Chapter XXXI.
ENGLISH AND FRENCH


The hour having come, they went with their four lackeys to a spot
behind the Luxembourg given up to the feeding of goats. Athos threw a
piece of money to the goatkeeper to withdraw. The lackeys were ordered
to act as sentinels.

A silent party soon drew near to the same enclosure, entered, and
joined the Musketeers. Then, according to foreign custom, the
presentations took place.

The Englishmen were all men of rank; consequently the odd names of
their adversaries were for them not only a matter of surprise, but of
annoyance.

“But after all,” said Lord de Winter, when the three friends had been
named, “we do not know who you are. We cannot fight with such names;
they are names of shepherds.”

“Therefore your lordship may suppose they are only assumed names,” said
Athos.

“Which only gives us a greater desire to know the real ones,” replied
the Englishman.

“You played very willingly with us without knowing our names,” said
Athos, “by the same token that you won our horses.”

“That is true, but we then only risked our pistoles; this time we risk
our blood. One plays with anybody; but one fights only with equals.”

“And that is but just,” said Athos, and he took aside the one of the
four Englishmen with whom he was to fight, and communicated his name in
a low voice.

Porthos and Aramis did the same.

“Does that satisfy you?” said Athos to his adversary. “Do you find me
of sufficient rank to do me the honor of crossing swords with me?”

“Yes, monsieur,” said the Englishman, bowing.

“Well! now shall I tell you something?” added Athos, coolly.

“What?” replied the Englishman.

“Why, that is that you would have acted much more wisely if you had not
required me to make myself known.”

“Why so?”

“Because I am believed to be dead, and have reasons for wishing nobody
to know I am living; so that I shall be obliged to kill you to prevent
my secret from roaming over the fields.”

The Englishman looked at Athos, believing that he jested, but Athos did
not jest the least in the world.

“Gentlemen,” said Athos, addressing at the same time his companions and
their adversaries, “are we ready?”

“Yes!” answered the Englishmen and the Frenchmen, as with one voice.

“On guard, then!” cried Athos.

Immediately eight swords glittered in the rays of the setting sun, and
the combat began with an animosity very natural between men twice
enemies.

Athos fenced with as much calmness and method as if he had been
practicing in a fencing school.

Porthos, abated, no doubt, of his too-great confidence by his adventure
of Chantilly, played with skill and prudence. Aramis, who had the third
canto of his poem to finish, behaved like a man in haste.

Athos killed his adversary first. He hit him but once, but as he had
foretold, that hit was a mortal one; the sword pierced his heart.

Second, Porthos stretched his upon the grass with a wound through his
thigh, As the Englishman, without making any further resistance, then
surrendered his sword, Porthos took him up in his arms and bore him to
his carriage.

Aramis pushed his so vigorously that after going back fifty paces, the
man ended by fairly taking to his heels, and disappeared amid the
hooting of the lackeys.

As to D’Artagnan, he fought purely and simply on the defensive; and
when he saw his adversary pretty well fatigued, with a vigorous side
thrust sent his sword flying. The baron, finding himself disarmed, took
two or three steps back, but in this movement his foot slipped and he
fell backward.

D’Artagnan was over him at a bound, and said to the Englishman,
pointing his sword to his throat, “I could kill you, my Lord, you are
completely in my hands; but I spare your life for the sake of your
sister.”

D’Artagnan was at the height of joy; he had realized the plan he had
imagined beforehand, whose picturing had produced the smiles we noted
upon his face.

The Englishman, delighted at having to do with a gentleman of such a
kind disposition, pressed D’Artagnan in his arms, and paid a thousand
compliments to the three Musketeers, and as Porthos’s adversary was
already installed in the carriage, and as Aramis’s had taken to his
heels, they had nothing to think about but the dead.

As Porthos and Aramis were undressing him, in the hope of finding his
wound not mortal, a large purse dropped from his clothes. D’Artagnan
picked it up and offered it to Lord de Winter.

“What the devil would you have me do with that?” said the Englishman.

“You can restore it to his family,” said D’Artagnan.

“His family will care much about such a trifle as that! His family will
inherit fifteen thousand louis a year from him. Keep the purse for your
lackeys.”

D’Artagnan put the purse into his pocket.

“And now, my young friend, for you will permit me, I hope, to give you
that name,” said Lord de Winter, “on this very evening, if agreeable to
you, I will present you to my sister, Milady Clarik, for I am desirous
that she should take you into her good graces; and as she is not in bad
odor at court, she may perhaps on some future day speak a word that
will not prove useless to you.”

D’Artagnan blushed with pleasure, and bowed a sign of assent.

At this time Athos came up to D’Artagnan.

“What do you mean to do with that purse?” whispered he.

“Why, I meant to pass it over to you, my dear Athos.”

“Me! why to me?”

“Why, you killed him! They are the spoils of victory.”

“I, the heir of an enemy!” said Athos; “for whom, then, do you take
me?”

“It is the custom in war,” said D’Artagnan, “why should it not be the
custom in a duel?”

“Even on the field of battle, I have never done that.”

Porthos shrugged his shoulders; Aramis by a movement of his lips
endorsed Athos.

“Then,” said D’Artagnan, “let us give the money to the lackeys, as Lord
de Winter desired us to do.”

“Yes,” said Athos; “let us give the money to the lackeys—not to our
lackeys, but to the lackeys of the Englishmen.”

Athos took the purse, and threw it into the hand of the coachman. “For
you and your comrades.”

This greatness of spirit in a man who was quite destitute struck even
Porthos; and this French generosity, repeated by Lord de Winter and his
friend, was highly applauded, except by MM. Grimaud, Bazin, Mousqueton
and Planchet.

Lord de Winter, on quitting D’Artagnan, gave him his sister’s address.
She lived in the Place Royale—then the fashionable quarter—at Number 6,
and he undertook to call and take D’Artagnan with him in order to
introduce him. D’Artagnan appointed eight o’clock at Athos’s residence.

This introduction to Milady Clarik occupied the head of our Gascon
greatly. He remembered in what a strange manner this woman had hitherto
been mixed up in his destiny. According to his conviction, she was some
creature of the cardinal, and yet he felt himself invincibly drawn
toward her by one of those sentiments for which we cannot account. His
only fear was that Milady would recognize in him the man of Meung and
of Dover. Then she knew that he was one of the friends of M. de
Tréville, and consequently, that he belonged body and soul to the king;
which would make him lose a part of his advantage, since when known to
Milady as he knew her, he played only an equal game with her. As to the
commencement of an intrigue between her and M. de Wardes, our
presumptuous hero gave but little heed to that, although the marquis
was young, handsome, rich, and high in the cardinal’s favor. It is not
for nothing we are but twenty years old, above all if we were born at
Tarbes.

D’Artagnan began by making his most splendid toilet, then returned to
Athos’s, and according to custom, related everything to him. Athos
listened to his projects, then shook his head, and recommended prudence
to him with a shade of bitterness.

“What!” said he, “you have just lost one woman, whom you call good,
charming, perfect; and here you are, running headlong after another.”

D’Artagnan felt the truth of this reproach.

“I loved Madame Bonacieux with my heart, while I only love Milady with
my head,” said he. “In getting introduced to her, my principal object
is to ascertain what part she plays at court.”

“The part she plays, _pardieu!_ It is not difficult to divine that,
after all you have told me. She is some emissary of the cardinal; a
woman who will draw you into a snare in which you will leave your
head.”

“The devil! my dear Athos, you view things on the dark side, methinks.”

“My dear fellow, I mistrust women. Can it be otherwise? I bought my
experience dearly—particularly fair women. Milady is fair, you say?”

“She has the most beautiful light hair imaginable!”

“Ah, my poor D’Artagnan!” said Athos.

“Listen to me! I want to be enlightened on a subject; then, when I
shall have learned what I desire to know, I will withdraw.”

“Be enlightened!” said Athos, phlegmatically.

Lord de Winter arrived at the appointed time; but Athos, being warned
of his coming, went into the other chamber. He therefore found
D’Artagnan alone, and as it was nearly eight o’clock he took the young
man with him.

An elegant carriage waited below, and as it was drawn by two excellent
horses, they were soon at the Place Royale.

Milady Clarik received D’Artagnan ceremoniously. Her hôtel was
remarkably sumptuous, and while the most part of the English had quit,
or were about to quit, France on account of the war, Milady had just
been laying out much money upon her residence; which proved that the
general measure which drove the English from France did not affect her.

“You see,” said Lord de Winter, presenting D’Artagnan to his sister, “a
young gentleman who has held my life in his hands, and who has not
abused his advantage, although we have been twice enemies, although it
was I who insulted him, and although I am an Englishman. Thank him,
then, madame, if you have any affection for me.”

Milady frowned slightly; a scarcely visible cloud passed over her brow,
and so peculiar a smile appeared upon her lips that the young man, who
saw and observed this triple shade, almost shuddered at it.

The brother did not perceive this; he had turned round to play with
Milady’s favorite monkey, which had pulled him by the doublet.

“You are welcome, monsieur,” said Milady, in a voice whose singular
sweetness contrasted with the symptoms of ill-humor which D’Artagnan
had just remarked; “you have today acquired eternal rights to my
gratitude.”

The Englishman then turned round and described the combat without
omitting a single detail. Milady listened with the greatest attention,
and yet it was easily to be perceived, whatever effort she made to
conceal her impressions, that this recital was not agreeable to her.
The blood rose to her head, and her little foot worked with impatience
beneath her robe.

Lord de Winter perceived nothing of this. When he had finished, he went
to a table upon which was a salver with Spanish wine and glasses. He
filled two glasses, and by a sign invited D’Artagnan to drink.

D’Artagnan knew it was considered disobliging by an Englishman to
refuse to pledge him. He therefore drew near to the table and took the
second glass. He did not, however, lose sight of Milady, and in a
mirror he perceived the change that came over her face. Now that she
believed herself to be no longer observed, a sentiment resembling
ferocity animated her countenance. She bit her handkerchief with her
beautiful teeth.

That pretty little _soubrette_ whom D’Artagnan had already observed
then came in. She spoke some words to Lord de Winter in English, who
thereupon requested D’Artagnan’s permission to retire, excusing himself
on account of the urgency of the business that had called him away, and
charging his sister to obtain his pardon.

D’Artagnan exchanged a shake of the hand with Lord de Winter, and then
returned to Milady. Her countenance, with surprising mobility, had
recovered its gracious expression; but some little red spots on her
handkerchief indicated that she had bitten her lips till the blood
came. Those lips were magnificent; they might be said to be of coral.

The conversation took a cheerful turn. Milady appeared to have entirely
recovered. She told D’Artagnan that Lord de Winter was her
brother-in-law, and not her brother. She had married a younger brother
of the family, who had left her a widow with one child. This child was
the only heir to Lord de Winter, if Lord de Winter did not marry. All
this showed D’Artagnan that there was a veil which concealed something;
but he could not yet see under this veil.

In addition to this, after a half hour’s conversation D’Artagnan was
convinced that Milady was his compatriot; she spoke French with an
elegance and a purity that left no doubt on that head.

D’Artagnan was profuse in gallant speeches and protestations of
devotion. To all the simple things which escaped our Gascon, Milady
replied with a smile of kindness. The hour came for him to retire.
D’Artagnan took leave of Milady, and left the saloon the happiest of
men.

On the staircase he met the pretty _soubrette_, who brushed gently
against him as she passed, and then, blushing to the eyes, asked his
pardon for having touched him in a voice so sweet that the pardon was
granted instantly.

D’Artagnan came again on the morrow, and was still better received than
on the evening before. Lord de Winter was not at home; and it was
Milady who this time did all the honors of the evening. She appeared to
take a great interest in him, asked him whence he came, who were his
friends, and whether he had not sometimes thought of attaching himself
to the cardinal.

D’Artagnan, who, as we have said, was exceedingly prudent for a young
man of twenty, then remembered his suspicions regarding Milady. He
launched into a eulogy of his Eminence, and said that he should not
have failed to enter into the Guards of the cardinal instead of the
king’s Guards if he had happened to know M. de Cavois instead of M. de
Tréville.

Milady changed the conversation without any appearance of affectation,
and asked D’Artagnan in the most careless manner possible if he had
ever been in England.

D’Artagnan replied that he had been sent thither by M. de Tréville to
treat for a supply of horses, and that he had brought back four as
specimens.

Milady in the course of the conversation twice or thrice bit her lips;
she had to deal with a Gascon who played close.

At the same hour as on the preceding evening, D’Artagnan retired. In
the corridor he again met the pretty Kitty; that was the name of the
_soubrette_. She looked at him with an expression of kindness which it
was impossible to mistake; but D’Artagnan was so preoccupied by the
mistress that he noticed absolutely nothing but her.

D’Artagnan came again on the morrow and the day after that, and each
day Milady gave him a more gracious reception.

Every evening, either in the antechamber, the corridor, or on the
stairs, he met the pretty _soubrette_. But, as we have said, D’Artagnan
paid no attention to this persistence of poor Kitty.




Chapter XXXII.
A PROCURATOR’S DINNER


However brilliant had been the part played by Porthos in the duel, it
had not made him forget the dinner of the procurator’s wife.

On the morrow he received the last touches of Mousqueton’s brush for an
hour, and took his way toward the Rue aux Ours with the steps of a man
who was doubly in favor with fortune.

His heart beat, but not like D’Artagnan’s with a young and impatient
love. No; a more material interest stirred his blood. He was about at
last to pass that mysterious threshold, to climb those unknown stairs
by which, one by one, the old crowns of M. Coquenard had ascended. He
was about to see in reality a certain coffer of which he had twenty
times beheld the image in his dreams—a coffer long and deep, locked,
bolted, fastened in the wall; a coffer of which he had so often heard,
and which the hands—a little wrinkled, it is true, but still not
without elegance—of the procurator’s wife were about to open to his
admiring looks.

And then he—a wanderer on the earth, a man without fortune, a man
without family, a soldier accustomed to inns, cabarets, taverns, and
restaurants, a lover of wine forced to depend upon chance treats—was
about to partake of family meals, to enjoy the pleasures of a
comfortable establishment, and to give himself up to those little
attentions which “the harder one is, the more they please,” as old
soldiers say.

To come in the capacity of a cousin, and seat himself every day at a
good table; to smooth the yellow, wrinkled brow of the old procurator;
to pluck the clerks a little by teaching them _bassette_, _passe-dix_,
and _lansquenet_, in their utmost nicety, and winning from them, by way
of fee for the lesson he would give them in an hour, their savings of a
month—all this was enormously delightful to Porthos.

The Musketeer could not forget the evil reports which then prevailed,
and which indeed have survived them, of the procurators of the
period—meanness, stinginess, fasts; but as, after all, excepting some
few acts of economy which Porthos had always found very unseasonable,
the procurator’s wife had been tolerably liberal—that is, be it
understood, for a procurator’s wife—he hoped to see a household of a
highly comfortable kind.

And yet, at the very door the Musketeer began to entertain some doubts.
The approach was not such as to prepossess people—an ill-smelling, dark
passage, a staircase half-lighted by bars through which stole a glimmer
from a neighboring yard; on the first floor a low door studded with
enormous nails, like the principal gate of the Grand Châtelet.

Porthos knocked with his hand. A tall, pale clerk, his face shaded by a
forest of virgin hair, opened the door, and bowed with the air of a man
forced at once to respect in another lofty stature, which indicated
strength, the military dress, which indicated rank, and a ruddy
countenance, which indicated familiarity with good living.

A shorter clerk came behind the first, a taller clerk behind the
second, a stripling of a dozen years rising behind the third. In all,
three clerks and a half, which, for the time, argued a very extensive
clientage.

Although the Musketeer was not expected before one o’clock, the
procurator’s wife had been on the watch ever since midday, reckoning
that the heart, or perhaps the stomach, of her lover would bring him
before his time.

Mme. Coquenard therefore entered the office from the house at the same
moment her guest entered from the stairs, and the appearance of the
worthy lady relieved him from an awkward embarrassment. The clerks
surveyed him with great curiosity, and he, not knowing well what to say
to this ascending and descending scale, remained tongue-tied.

“It is my cousin!” cried the procurator’s wife. “Come in, come in,
Monsieur Porthos!”

The name of Porthos produced its effect upon the clerks, who began to
laugh; but Porthos turned sharply round, and every countenance quickly
recovered its gravity.

They reached the office of the procurator after having passed through
the antechamber in which the clerks were, and the study in which they
ought to have been. This last apartment was a sort of dark room,
littered with papers. On quitting the study they left the kitchen on
the right, and entered the reception room.

All these rooms, which communicated with one another, did not inspire
Porthos favorably. Words might be heard at a distance through all these
open doors. Then, while passing, he had cast a rapid, investigating
glance into the kitchen; and he was obliged to confess to himself, to
the shame of the procurator’s wife and his own regret, that he did not
see that fire, that animation, that bustle, which when a good repast is
on foot prevails generally in that sanctuary of good living.

The procurator had without doubt been warned of his visit, as he
expressed no surprise at the sight of Porthos, who advanced toward him
with a sufficiently easy air, and saluted him courteously.

“We are cousins, it appears, Monsieur Porthos?” said the procurator,
rising, yet supporting his weight upon the arms of his cane chair.

The old man, wrapped in a large black doublet, in which the whole of
his slender body was concealed, was brisk and dry. His little gray eyes
shone like carbuncles, and appeared, with his grinning mouth, to be the
only part of his face in which life survived. Unfortunately the legs
began to refuse their service to this bony machine. During the last
five or six months that this weakness had been felt, the worthy
procurator had nearly become the slave of his wife.

The cousin was received with resignation, that was all. M. Coquenard,
firm upon his legs, would have declined all relationship with M.
Porthos.

“Yes, monsieur, we are cousins,” said Porthos, without being
disconcerted, as he had never reckoned upon being received
enthusiastically by the husband.

“By the female side, I believe?” said the procurator, maliciously.

Porthos did not feel the ridicule of this, and took it for a piece of
simplicity, at which he laughed in his large mustache. Mme. Coquenard,
who knew that a simple-minded procurator was a very rare variety in the
species, smiled a little, and colored a great deal.

M. Coquenard had, since the arrival of Porthos, frequently cast his
eyes with great uneasiness upon a large chest placed in front of his
oak desk. Porthos comprehended that this chest, although it did not
correspond in shape with that which he had seen in his dreams, must be
the blessed coffer, and he congratulated himself that the reality was
several feet higher than the dream.

M. Coquenard did not carry his genealogical investigations any further;
but withdrawing his anxious look from the chest and fixing it upon
Porthos, he contented himself with saying, “Monsieur our cousin will do
us the favor of dining with us once before his departure for the
campaign, will he not, Madame Coquenard?”

This time Porthos received the blow right in his stomach, and felt it.
It appeared likewise that Mme. Coquenard was not less affected by it on
her part, for she added, “My cousin will not return if he finds that we
do not treat him kindly; but otherwise he has so little time to pass in
Paris, and consequently to spare to us, that we must entreat him to
give us every instant he can call his own previous to his departure.”

“Oh, my legs, my poor legs! where are you?” murmured Coquenard, and he
tried to smile.

This succor, which came to Porthos at the moment in which he was
attacked in his gastronomic hopes, inspired much gratitude in the
Musketeer toward the procurator’s wife.

The hour of dinner soon arrived. They passed into the eating room—a
large dark room situated opposite the kitchen.

The clerks, who, as it appeared, had smelled unusual perfumes in the
house, were of military punctuality, and held their stools in hand
quite ready to sit down. Their jaws moved preliminarily with fearful
threatenings.

“Indeed!” thought Porthos, casting a glance at the three hungry
clerks—for the errand boy, as might be expected, was not admitted to
the honors of the magisterial table, “in my cousin’s place, I would not
keep such gourmands! They look like shipwrecked sailors who have not
eaten for six weeks.”

M. Coquenard entered, pushed along upon his armchair with casters by
Mme. Coquenard, whom Porthos assisted in rolling her husband up to the
table. He had scarcely entered when he began to agitate his nose and
his jaws after the example of his clerks.

“Oh, oh!” said he; “here is a soup which is rather inviting.”

“What the devil can they smell so extraordinary in this soup?” said
Porthos, at the sight of a pale liquid, abundant but entirely free from
meat, on the surface of which a few crusts swam about as rare as the
islands of an archipelago.

Mme. Coquenard smiled, and upon a sign from her everyone eagerly took
his seat.

M. Coquenard was served first, then Porthos. Afterward Mme. Coquenard
filled her own plate, and distributed the crusts without soup to the
impatient clerks. At this moment the door of the dining room unclosed
with a creak, and Porthos perceived through the half-open flap the
little clerk who, not being allowed to take part in the feast, ate his
dry bread in the passage with the double odor of the dining room and
kitchen.

After the soup the maid brought a boiled fowl—a piece of magnificence
which caused the eyes of the diners to dilate in such a manner that
they seemed ready to burst.

“One may see that you love your family, Madame Coquenard,” said the
procurator, with a smile that was almost tragic. “You are certainly
treating your cousin very handsomely!”

The poor fowl was thin, and covered with one of those thick, bristly
skins through which the teeth cannot penetrate with all their efforts.
The fowl must have been sought for a long time on the perch, to which
it had retired to die of old age.

“The devil!” thought Porthos, “this is poor work. I respect old age,
but I don’t much like it boiled or roasted.”

And he looked round to see if anybody partook of his opinion; but on
the contrary, he saw nothing but eager eyes which were devouring, in
anticipation, that sublime fowl which was the object of his contempt.

Mme. Coquenard drew the dish toward her, skillfully detached the two
great black feet, which she placed upon her husband’s plate, cut off
the neck, which with the head she put on one side for herself, raised
the wing for Porthos, and then returned the bird otherwise intact to
the servant who had brought it in, who disappeared with it before the
Musketeer had time to examine the variations which disappointment
produces upon faces, according to the characters and temperaments of
those who experience it.

In the place of the fowl a dish of haricot beans made its appearance—an
enormous dish in which some bones of mutton that at first sight one
might have believed to have some meat on them pretended to show
themselves.

But the clerks were not the dupes of this deceit, and their lugubrious
looks settled down into resigned countenances.

Mme. Coquenard distributed this dish to the young men with the
moderation of a good housewife.

The time for wine came. M. Coquenard poured from a very small stone
bottle the third of a glass for each of the young men, served himself
in about the same proportion, and passed the bottle to Porthos and Mme.
Coquenard.

The young men filled up their third of a glass with water; then, when
they had drunk half the glass, they filled it up again, and continued
to do so. This brought them, by the end of the repast, to swallowing a
drink which from the color of the ruby had passed to that of a pale
topaz.

Porthos ate his wing of the fowl timidly, and shuddered when he felt
the knee of the procurator’s wife under the table, as it came in search
of his. He also drank half a glass of this sparingly served wine, and
found it to be nothing but that horrible Montreuil—the terror of all
expert palates.

M. Coquenard saw him swallowing this wine undiluted, and sighed deeply.

“Will you eat any of these beans, Cousin Porthos?” said Mme. Coquenard,
in that tone which says, “Take my advice, don’t touch them.”

“Devil take me if I taste one of them!” murmured Porthos to himself,
and then said aloud, “Thank you, my cousin, I am no longer hungry.”

There was silence. Porthos could hardly keep his countenance.

The procurator repeated several times, “Ah, Madame Coquenard! Accept my
compliments; your dinner has been a real feast. Lord, how I have
eaten!”

M. Coquenard had eaten his soup, the black feet of the fowl, and the
only mutton bone on which there was the least appearance of meat.

Porthos fancied they were mystifying him, and began to curl his
mustache and knit his eyebrows; but the knee of Mme. Coquenard gently
advised him to be patient.

This silence and this interruption in serving, which were
unintelligible to Porthos, had, on the contrary, a terrible meaning for
the clerks. Upon a look from the procurator, accompanied by a smile
from Mme. Coquenard, they arose slowly from the table, folded their
napkins more slowly still, bowed, and retired.

“Go, young men! go and promote digestion by working,” said the
procurator, gravely.

The clerks gone, Mme. Coquenard rose and took from a buffet a piece of
cheese, some preserved quinces, and a cake which she had herself made
of almonds and honey.

M. Coquenard knit his eyebrows because there were too many good things.
Porthos bit his lips because he saw not the wherewithal to dine. He
looked to see if the dish of beans was still there; the dish of beans
had disappeared.

“A positive feast!” cried M. Coquenard, turning about in his chair, “a
real feast, _epulœ epulorum_. Lucullus dines with Lucullus.”

Porthos looked at the bottle, which was near him, and hoped that with
wine, bread, and cheese, he might make a dinner; but wine was wanting,
the bottle was empty. M. and Mme. Coquenard did not seem to observe it.

“This is fine!” said Porthos to himself; “I am prettily caught!”

He passed his tongue over a spoonful of preserves, and stuck his teeth
into the sticky pastry of Mme. Coquenard.

“Now,” said he, “the sacrifice is consummated! Ah! if I had not the
hope of peeping with Madame Coquenard into her husband’s chest!”

M. Coquenard, after the luxuries of such a repast, which he called an
excess, felt the want of a siesta. Porthos began to hope that the thing
would take place at the present sitting, and in that same locality; but
the procurator would listen to nothing, he would be taken to his room,
and was not satisfied till he was close to his chest, upon the edge of
which, for still greater precaution, he placed his feet.

The procurator’s wife took Porthos into an adjoining room, and they
began to lay the basis of a reconciliation.

“You can come and dine three times a week,” said Mme. Coquenard.

“Thanks, madame!” said Porthos, “but I don’t like to abuse your
kindness; besides, I must think of my outfit!”

“That’s true,” said the procurator’s wife, groaning, “that unfortunate
outfit!”

“Alas, yes,” said Porthos, “it is so.”

“But of what, then, does the equipment of your company consist,
Monsieur Porthos?”

“Oh, of many things!” said Porthos. “The Musketeers are, as you know,
picked soldiers, and they require many things useless to the Guardsmen
or the Swiss.”

“But yet, detail them to me.”

“Why, they may amount to—“, said Porthos, who preferred discussing the
total to taking them one by one.

The procurator’s wife waited tremblingly.

“To how much?” said she. “I hope it does not exceed—” She stopped;
speech failed her.

“Oh, no,” said Porthos, “it does not exceed two thousand five hundred
livres! I even think that with economy I could manage it with two
thousand livres.”

“Good God!” cried she, “two thousand livres! Why, that is a fortune!”

Porthos made a most significant grimace; Mme. Coquenard understood it.

“I wished to know the detail,” said she, “because, having many
relatives in business, I was almost sure of obtaining things at a
hundred per cent less than you would pay yourself.”

“Ah, ah!” said Porthos, “that is what you meant to say!”

“Yes, dear Monsieur Porthos. Thus, for instance, don’t you in the first
place want a horse?”

“Yes, a horse.”

“Well, then! I can just suit you.”

“Ah!” said Porthos, brightening, “that’s well as regards my horse; but
I must have the appointments complete, as they include objects which a
Musketeer alone can purchase, and which will not amount, besides, to
more than three hundred livres.”

“Three hundred livres? Then put down three hundred livres,” said the
procurator’s wife, with a sigh.

Porthos smiled. It may be remembered that he had the saddle which came
from Buckingham. These three hundred livres he reckoned upon putting
snugly into his pocket.

“Then,” continued he, “there is a horse for my lackey, and my valise.
As to my arms, it is useless to trouble you about them; I have them.”

“A horse for your lackey?” resumed the procurator’s wife, hesitatingly;
“but that is doing things in lordly style, my friend.”

“Ah, madame!” said Porthos, haughtily; “do you take me for a beggar?”

“No; I only thought that a pretty mule makes sometimes as good an
appearance as a horse, and it seemed to me that by getting a pretty
mule for Mousqueton—”

“Well, agreed for a pretty mule,” said Porthos; “you are right, I have
seen very great Spanish nobles whose whole suite were mounted on mules.
But then you understand, Madame Coquenard, a mule with feathers and
bells.”

“Be satisfied,” said the procurator’s wife.

“There remains the valise,” added Porthos.

“Oh, don’t let that disturb you,” cried Mme. Coquenard. “My husband has
five or six valises; you shall choose the best. There is one in
particular which he prefers in his journeys, large enough to hold all
the world.”

“Your valise is then empty?” asked Porthos, with simplicity.

“Certainly it is empty,” replied the procurator’s wife, in real
innocence.

“Ah, but the valise I want,” cried Porthos, “is a well-filled one, my
dear.”

Madame uttered fresh sighs. Molière had not written his scene in
“L’Avare” then. Mme. Coquenard was in the dilemma of Harpagan.

Finally, the rest of the equipment was successively debated in the same
manner; and the result of the sitting was that the procurator’s wife
should give eight hundred livres in money, and should furnish the horse
and the mule which should have the honor of carrying Porthos and
Mousqueton to glory.

These conditions being agreed to, Porthos took leave of Mme. Coquenard.
The latter wished to detain him by darting certain tender glances; but
Porthos urged the commands of duty, and the procurator’s wife was
obliged to give place to the king.

The Musketeer returned home hungry and in bad humor.




Chapter XXXIII.
SOUBRETTE AND MISTRESS


Meantime, as we have said, despite the cries of his conscience and the
wise counsels of Athos, D’Artagnan became hourly more in love with
Milady. Thus he never failed to pay his diurnal court to her; and the
self-satisfied Gascon was convinced that sooner or later she could not
fail to respond.

One day, when he arrived with his head in the air, and as light at
heart as a man who awaits a shower of gold, he found the _soubrette_
under the gateway of the hôtel; but this time the pretty Kitty was not
contented with touching him as he passed, she took him gently by the
hand.

“Good!” thought D’Artagnan, “She is charged with some message for me
from her mistress; she is about to appoint some rendezvous of which she
had not courage to speak.” And he looked down at the pretty girl with
the most triumphant air imaginable.

“I wish to say three words to you, Monsieur Chevalier,” stammered the
_soubrette_.

“Speak, my child, speak,” said D’Artagnan; “I listen.”

“Here? Impossible! That which I have to say is too long, and above all,
too secret.”

“Well, what is to be done?”

“If Monsieur Chevalier would follow me?” said Kitty, timidly.

“Where you please, my dear child.”

“Come, then.”

And Kitty, who had not let go the hand of D’Artagnan, led him up a
little dark, winding staircase, and after ascending about fifteen
steps, opened a door.

“Come in here, Monsieur Chevalier,” said she; “here we shall be alone,
and can talk.”

“And whose room is this, my dear child?”

“It is mine, Monsieur Chevalier; it communicates with my mistress’s by
that door. But you need not fear. She will not hear what we say; she
never goes to bed before midnight.”

D’Artagnan cast a glance around him. The little apartment was charming
for its taste and neatness; but in spite of himself, his eyes were
directed to that door which Kitty said led to Milady’s chamber.

Kitty guessed what was passing in the mind of the young man, and heaved
a deep sigh.

“You love my mistress, then, very dearly, Monsieur Chevalier?” said
she.

“Oh, more than I can say, Kitty! I am mad for her!”

Kitty breathed a second sigh.

“Alas, monsieur,” said she, “that is too bad.”

“What the devil do you see so bad in it?” said D’Artagnan.

“Because, monsieur,” replied Kitty, “my mistress loves you not at all.”

“_Hein!_” said D’Artagnan, “can she have charged you to tell me so?”

“Oh, no, monsieur; but out of the regard I have for you, I have taken
the resolution to tell you so.”

“Much obliged, my dear Kitty; but for the intention only—for the
information, you must agree, is not likely to be at all agreeable.”

“That is to say, you don’t believe what I have told you; is it not so?”

“We have always some difficulty in believing such things, my pretty
dear, were it only from self-love.”

“Then you don’t believe me?”

“I confess that unless you deign to give me some proof of what you
advance—”

“What do you think of this?”

Kitty drew a little note from her bosom.

“For me?” said D’Artagnan, seizing the letter.

“No; for another.”

“For another?”

“Yes.”

“His name; his name!” cried D’Artagnan.

“Read the address.”

“Monsieur El Comte de Wardes.”

The remembrance of the scene at St. Germain presented itself to the
mind of the presumptuous Gascon. As quick as thought, he tore open the
letter, in spite of the cry which Kitty uttered on seeing what he was
going to do, or rather, what he was doing.

“Oh, good Lord, Monsieur Chevalier,” said she, “what are you doing?”

“I?” said D’Artagnan; “nothing,” and he read,

“You have not answered my first note. Are you indisposed, or have you
forgotten the glances you favored me with at the ball of Mme. de Guise?
You have an opportunity now, Count; do not allow it to escape.”


D’Artagnan became very pale; he was wounded in his _self_-love: he
thought that it was in his _love_.

“Poor dear Monsieur d’Artagnan,” said Kitty, in a voice full of
compassion, and pressing anew the young man’s hand.

“You pity me, little one?” said D’Artagnan.

“Oh, yes, and with all my heart; for I know what it is to be in love.”

“You know what it is to be in love?” said D’Artagnan, looking at her
for the first time with much attention.

“Alas, yes.”

“Well, then, instead of pitying me, you would do much better to assist
me in avenging myself on your mistress.”

“And what sort of revenge would you take?”

“I would triumph over her, and supplant my rival.”

“I will never help you in that, Monsieur Chevalier,” said Kitty,
warmly.

“And why not?” demanded D’Artagnan.

“For two reasons.”

“What ones?”

“The first is that my mistress will never love you.”

“How do you know that?”

“You have cut her to the heart.”

“I? In what can I have offended her—I who ever since I have known her
have lived at her feet like a slave? Speak, I beg you!”

“I will never confess that but to the man—who should read to the bottom
of my soul!”

D’Artagnan looked at Kitty for the second time. The young girl had
freshness and beauty which many duchesses would have purchased with
their coronets.

“Kitty,” said he, “I will read to the bottom of your soul whenever you
like; don’t let that disturb you.” And he gave her a kiss at which the
poor girl became as red as a cherry.

“Oh, no,” said Kitty, “it is not me you love! It is my mistress you
love; you told me so just now.”

“And does that hinder you from letting me know the second reason?”

“The second reason, Monsieur the Chevalier,” replied Kitty, emboldened
by the kiss in the first place, and still further by the expression of
the eyes of the young man, “is that in love, everyone for herself!”

Then only D’Artagnan remembered the languishing glances of Kitty, her
constantly meeting him in the antechamber, the corridor, or on the
stairs, those touches of the hand every time she met him, and her deep
sighs; but absorbed by his desire to please the great lady, he had
disdained the _soubrette_. He whose game is the eagle takes no heed of
the sparrow.

But this time our Gascon saw at a glance all the advantage to be
derived from the love which Kitty had just confessed so innocently, or
so boldly: the interception of letters addressed to the Comte de
Wardes, news on the spot, entrance at all hours into Kitty’s chamber,
which was contiguous to her mistress’s. The perfidious deceiver was, as
may plainly be perceived, already sacrificing, in intention, the poor
girl in order to obtain Milady, willy-nilly.

“Well,” said he to the young girl, “are you willing, my dear Kitty,
that I should give you a proof of that love which you doubt?”

“What love?” asked the young girl.

“Of that which I am ready to feel toward you.”

“And what is that proof?”

“Are you willing that I should this evening pass with you the time I
generally spend with your mistress?”

“Oh, yes,” said Kitty, clapping her hands, “very willing.”

“Well, then, come here, my dear,” said D’Artagnan, establishing himself
in an easy chair; “come, and let me tell you that you are the prettiest
_soubrette_ I ever saw!”

And he did tell her so much, and so well, that the poor girl, who asked
nothing better than to believe him, did believe him. Nevertheless, to
D’Artagnan’s great astonishment, the pretty Kitty defended herself
resolutely.

Time passes quickly when it is passed in attacks and defenses. Midnight
sounded, and almost at the same time the bell was rung in Milady’s
chamber.

“Good God,” cried Kitty, “there is my mistress calling me! Go; go
directly!”

D’Artagnan rose, took his hat, as if it had been his intention to obey,
then, opening quickly the door of a large closet instead of that
leading to the staircase, he buried himself amid the robes and dressing
gowns of Milady.

“What are you doing?” cried Kitty.

D’Artagnan, who had secured the key, shut himself up in the closet
without reply.

“Well,” cried Milady, in a sharp voice. “Are you asleep, that you don’t
answer when I ring?”

And D’Artagnan heard the door of communication opened violently.

“Here am I, Milady, here am I!” cried Kitty, springing forward to meet
her mistress.

Both went into the bedroom, and as the door of communication remained
open, D’Artagnan could hear Milady for some time scolding her maid. She
was at length appeased, and the conversation turned upon him while
Kitty was assisting her mistress.

“Well,” said Milady, “I have not seen our Gascon this evening.”

“What, Milady! has he not come?” said Kitty. “Can he be inconstant
before being happy?”

“Oh, no; he must have been prevented by Monsieur de Tréville or
Monsieur Dessessart. I understand my game, Kitty; I have this one
safe.”

“What will you do with him, madame?”

“What will I do with him? Be easy, Kitty, there is something between
that man and me that he is quite ignorant of: he nearly made me lose my
credit with his Eminence. Oh, I will be revenged!”

“I believed that Madame loved him.”

“I love him? I detest him! An idiot, who held the life of Lord de
Winter in his hands and did not kill him, by which I missed three
hundred thousand livres’ income.”

“That’s true,” said Kitty; “your son was the only heir of his uncle,
and until his majority you would have had the enjoyment of his
fortune.”

D’Artagnan shuddered to the marrow at hearing this suave creature
reproach him, with that sharp voice which she took such pains to
conceal in conversation, for not having killed a man whom he had seen
load her with kindnesses.

“For all this,” continued Milady, “I should long ago have revenged
myself on him if, and I don’t know why, the cardinal had not requested
me to conciliate him.”

“Oh, yes; but Madame has not conciliated that little woman he was so
fond of.”

“What, the mercer’s wife of the Rue des Fossoyeurs? Has he not already
forgotten she ever existed? Fine vengeance that, on my faith!”

A cold sweat broke from D’Artagnan’s brow. Why, this woman was a
monster! He resumed his listening, but unfortunately the toilet was
finished.

“That will do,” said Milady; “go into your own room, and tomorrow
endeavor again to get me an answer to the letter I gave you.”

“For Monsieur de Wardes?” said Kitty.

“To be sure; for Monsieur de Wardes.”

“Now, there is one,” said Kitty, “who appears to me quite a different
sort of a man from that poor Monsieur d’Artagnan.”

“Go to bed, mademoiselle,” said Milady; “I don’t like comments.”

D’Artagnan heard the door close; then the noise of two bolts by which
Milady fastened herself in. On her side, but as softly as possible,
Kitty turned the key of the lock, and then D’Artagnan opened the closet
door.

“Oh, good Lord!” said Kitty, in a low voice, “what is the matter with
you? How pale you are!”

“The abominable creature,” murmured D’Artagnan.

“Silence, silence, begone!” said Kitty. “There is nothing but a
wainscot between my chamber and Milady’s; every word that is uttered in
one can be heard in the other.”

“That’s exactly the reason I won’t go,” said D’Artagnan.

“What!” said Kitty, blushing.

“Or, at least, I will go—later.”

He drew Kitty to him. She had the less motive to resist, resistance
would make so much noise. Therefore Kitty surrendered.

It was a movement of vengeance upon Milady. D’Artagnan believed it
right to say that vengeance is the pleasure of the gods. With a little
more heart, he might have been contented with this new conquest; but
the principal features of his character were ambition and pride. It
must, however, be confessed in his justification that the first use he
made of his influence over Kitty was to try and find out what had
become of Mme. Bonacieux; but the poor girl swore upon the crucifix to
D’Artagnan that she was entirely ignorant on that head, her mistress
never admitting her into half her secrets—only she believed she could
say she was not dead.

As to the cause which was near making Milady lose her credit with the
cardinal, Kitty knew nothing about it; but this time D’Artagnan was
better informed than she was. As he had seen Milady on board a vessel
at the moment he was leaving England, he suspected that it was, almost
without a doubt, on account of the diamond studs.

But what was clearest in all this was that the true hatred, the
profound hatred, the inveterate hatred of Milady, was increased by his
not having killed her brother-in-law.

D’Artagnan came the next day to Milady’s, and finding her in a very
ill-humor, had no doubt that it was lack of an answer from M. de Wardes
that provoked her thus. Kitty came in, but Milady was very cross with
her. The poor girl ventured a glance at D’Artagnan which said, “See how
I suffer on your account!”

Toward the end of the evening, however, the beautiful lioness became
milder; she smilingly listened to the soft speeches of D’Artagnan, and
even gave him her hand to kiss.

D’Artagnan departed, scarcely knowing what to think, but as he was a
youth who did not easily lose his head, while continuing to pay his
court to Milady, he had framed a little plan in his mind.

He found Kitty at the gate, and, as on the preceding evening, went up
to her chamber. Kitty had been accused of negligence and severely
scolded. Milady could not at all comprehend the silence of the Comte de
Wardes, and she ordered Kitty to come at nine o’clock in the morning to
take a third letter.

D’Artagnan made Kitty promise to bring him that letter on the following
morning. The poor girl promised all her lover desired; she was mad.

Things passed as on the night before. D’Artagnan concealed himself in
his closet; Milady called, undressed, sent away Kitty, and shut the
door. As the night before, D’Artagnan did not return home till five
o’clock in the morning.

At eleven o’clock Kitty came to him. She held in her hand a fresh
billet from Milady. This time the poor girl did not even argue with
D’Artagnan; she gave it to him at once. She belonged body and soul to
her handsome soldier.

D’Artagnan opened the letter and read as follows:

This is the third time I have written to you to tell you that I love
you. Beware that I do not write to you a fourth time to tell you that I
detest you.
    If you repent of the manner in which you have acted toward me, the
    young girl who brings you this will tell you how a man of spirit
    may obtain his pardon.


D’Artagnan colored and grew pale several times in reading this billet.

“Oh, you love her still,” said Kitty, who had not taken her eyes off
the young man’s countenance for an instant.

“No, Kitty, you are mistaken. I do not love her, but I will avenge
myself for her contempt.”

“Oh, yes, I know what sort of vengeance! You told me that!”

“What matters it to you, Kitty? You know it is you alone whom I love.”

“How can I know that?”

“By the scorn I will throw upon her.”

D’Artagnan took a pen and wrote:

MADAME, Until the present moment I could not believe that it was to me
your first two letters were addressed, so unworthy did I feel myself of
such an honor; besides, I was so seriously indisposed that I could not
in any case have replied to them.
    But now I am forced to believe in the excess of your kindness,
    since not only your letter but your servant assures me that I have
    the good fortune to be beloved by you.
    She has no occasion to teach me the way in which a man of spirit
    may obtain his pardon. I will come and ask mine at eleven o’clock
    this evening.
    To delay it a single day would be in my eyes now to commit a fresh
    offense.
    From him whom you have rendered the happiest of men,


COMTE DE WARDES


This note was in the first place a forgery; it was likewise an
indelicacy. It was even, according to our present manners, something
like an infamous action; but at that period people did not manage
affairs as they do today. Besides, D’Artagnan from her own admission
knew Milady culpable of treachery in matters more important, and could
entertain no respect for her. And yet, notwithstanding this want of
respect, he felt an uncontrollable passion for this woman boiling in
his veins—passion drunk with contempt; but passion or thirst, as the
reader pleases.

D’Artagnan’s plan was very simple. By Kitty’s chamber he could gain
that of her mistress. He would take advantage of the first moment of
surprise, shame, and terror, to triumph over her. He might fail, but
something must be left to chance. In eight days the campaign would
open, and he would be compelled to leave Paris; D’Artagnan had no time
for a prolonged love siege.

“There,” said the young man, handing Kitty the letter sealed; “give
that to Milady. It is the count’s reply.”

Poor Kitty became as pale as death; she suspected what the letter
contained.

“Listen, my dear girl,” said D’Artagnan; “you cannot but perceive that
all this must end, some way or other. Milady may discover that you gave
the first billet to my lackey instead of to the count’s; that it is I
who have opened the others which ought to have been opened by de
Wardes. Milady will then turn you out of doors, and you know she is not
the woman to limit her vengeance.”

“Alas!” said Kitty, “for whom have I exposed myself to all that?”

“For me, I well know, my sweet girl,” said D’Artagnan. “But I am
grateful, I swear to you.”

“But what does this note contain?”

“Milady will tell you.”

“Ah, you do not love me!” cried Kitty, “and I am very wretched.”

To this reproach there is always one response which deludes women.
D’Artagnan replied in such a manner that Kitty remained in her great
delusion. Although she cried freely before deciding to transmit the
letter to her mistress, she did at last so decide, which was all
D’Artagnan wished. Finally he promised that he would leave her
mistress’s presence at an early hour that evening, and that when he
left the mistress he would ascend with the maid. This promise completed
poor Kitty’s consolation.




Chapter XXXIV.
IN WHICH THE EQUIPMENT OF ARAMIS AND PORTHOS IS TREATED OF


Since the four friends had been each in search of his equipments, there
had been no fixed meeting between them. They dined apart from one
another, wherever they might happen to be, or rather where they could.
Duty likewise on its part took a portion of that precious time which
was gliding away so rapidly—only they had agreed to meet once a week,
about one o’clock, at the residence of Athos, seeing that he, in
agreement with the vow he had formed, did not pass over the threshold
of his door.

This day of reunion was the same day as that on which Kitty came to
find D’Artagnan. Soon as Kitty left him, D’Artagnan directed his steps
toward the Rue Férou.

He found Athos and Aramis philosophizing. Aramis had some slight
inclination to resume the cassock. Athos, according to his system,
neither encouraged nor dissuaded him. Athos believed that everyone
should be left to his own free will. He never gave advice but when it
was asked, and even then he required to be asked twice.

“People, in general,” he said, “only ask advice not to follow it; or if
they do follow it, it is for the sake of having someone to blame for
having given it.”

Porthos arrived a minute after D’Artagnan. The four friends were
reunited.

The four countenances expressed four different feelings: that of
Porthos, tranquillity; that of D’Artagnan, hope; that of Aramis,
uneasiness; that of Athos, carelessness.

At the end of a moment’s conversation, in which Porthos hinted that a
lady of elevated rank had condescended to relieve him from his
embarrassment, Mousqueton entered. He came to request his master to
return to his lodgings, where his presence was urgent, as he piteously
said.

“Is it my equipment?”

“Yes and no,” replied Mousqueton.

“Well, but can’t you speak?”

“Come, monsieur.”

Porthos rose, saluted his friends, and followed Mousqueton. An instant
after, Bazin made his appearance at the door.

“What do you want with me, my friend?” said Aramis, with that mildness
of language which was observable in him every time that his ideas were
directed toward the Church.

“A man wishes to see Monsieur at home,” replied Bazin.

“A man! What man?”

“A mendicant.”

“Give him alms, Bazin, and bid him pray for a poor sinner.”

“This mendicant insists upon speaking to you, and pretends that you
will be very glad to see him.”

“Has he sent no particular message for me?”

“Yes. If Monsieur Aramis hesitates to come,” he said, “tell him I am
from Tours.”

“From Tours!” cried Aramis. “A thousand pardons, gentlemen; but no
doubt this man brings me the news I expected.” And rising also, he went
off at a quick pace. There remained Athos and D’Artagnan.

“I believe these fellows have managed their business. What do you
think, D’Artagnan?” said Athos.

“I know that Porthos was in a fair way,” replied D’Artagnan; “and as to
Aramis to tell you the truth, I have never been seriously uneasy on his
account. But you, my dear Athos—you, who so generously distributed the
Englishman’s pistoles, which were our legitimate property—what do you
mean to do?”

“I am satisfied with having killed that fellow, my boy, seeing that it
is blessed bread to kill an Englishman; but if I had pocketed his
pistoles, they would have weighed me down like a remorse.”

“Go to, my dear Athos; you have truly inconceivable ideas.”

“Let it pass. What do you think of Monsieur de Tréville telling me,
when he did me the honor to call upon me yesterday, that you associated
with the suspected English, whom the cardinal protects?”

“That is to say, I visit an Englishwoman—the one I named.”

“Oh, ay! the fair woman on whose account I gave you advice, which
naturally you took care not to adopt.”

“I gave you my reasons.”

“Yes; you look there for your outfit, I think you said.”

“Not at all. I have acquired certain knowledge that that woman was
concerned in the abduction of Madame Bonacieux.”

“Yes, I understand now: to find one woman, you court another. It is the
longest road, but certainly the most amusing.”

D’Artagnan was on the point of telling Athos all; but one consideration
restrained him. Athos was a gentleman, punctilious in points of honor;
and there were in the plan which our lover had devised for Milady, he
was sure, certain things that would not obtain the assent of this
Puritan. He was therefore silent; and as Athos was the least
inquisitive of any man on earth, D’Artagnan’s confidence stopped there.
We will therefore leave the two friends, who had nothing important to
say to each other, and follow Aramis.

Upon being informed that the person who wanted to speak to him came
from Tours, we have seen with what rapidity the young man followed, or
rather went before, Bazin; he ran without stopping from the Rue Férou
to the Rue de Vaugirard. On entering he found a man of short stature
and intelligent eyes, but covered with rags.

“You have asked for me?” said the Musketeer.

“I wish to speak with Monsieur Aramis. Is that your name, monsieur?”

“My very own. You have brought me something?”

“Yes, if you show me a certain embroidered handkerchief.”

“Here it is,” said Aramis, taking a small key from his breast and
opening a little ebony box inlaid with mother of pearl, “here it is.
Look.”

“That is right,” replied the mendicant; “dismiss your lackey.”

In fact, Bazin, curious to know what the mendicant could want with his
master, kept pace with him as well as he could, and arrived almost at
the same time he did; but his quickness was not of much use to him. At
the hint from the mendicant his master made him a sign to retire, and
he was obliged to obey.

Bazin gone, the mendicant cast a rapid glance around him in order to be
sure that nobody could either see or hear him, and opening his ragged
vest, badly held together by a leather strap, he began to rip the upper
part of his doublet, from which he drew a letter.

Aramis uttered a cry of joy at the sight of the seal, kissed the
superscription with an almost religious respect, and opened the
epistle, which contained what follows:

“My Friend, it is the will of fate that we should be still for some
time separated; but the delightful days of youth are not lost beyond
return. Perform your duty in camp; I will do mine elsewhere. Accept
that which the bearer brings you; make the campaign like a handsome
true gentleman, and think of me, who kisses tenderly your black eyes.
    “Adieu; or rather, _au revoir_.”


The mendicant continued to rip his garments; and drew from amid his
rags a hundred and fifty Spanish double pistoles, which he laid down on
the table; then he opened the door, bowed, and went out before the
young man, stupefied by his letter, had ventured to address a word to
him.

Aramis then reperused the letter, and perceived a postscript:

PS. You may behave politely to the bearer, who is a count and a grandee
of Spain!


“Golden dreams!” cried Aramis. “Oh, beautiful life! Yes, we are young;
yes, we shall yet have happy days! My love, my blood, my life! all,
all, all, are thine, my adored mistress!”

And he kissed the letter with passion, without even vouchsafing a look
at the gold which sparkled on the table.

Bazin scratched at the door, and as Aramis had no longer any reason to
exclude him, he bade him come in.

Bazin was stupefied at the sight of the gold, and forgot that he came
to announce D’Artagnan, who, curious to know who the mendicant could
be, came to Aramis on leaving Athos.

Now, as D’Artagnan used no ceremony with Aramis, seeing that Bazin
forgot to announce him, he announced himself.

“The devil! my dear Aramis,” said D’Artagnan, “if these are the prunes
that are sent to you from Tours, I beg you will make my compliments to
the gardener who gathers them.”

“You are mistaken, friend D’Artagnan,” said Aramis, always on his
guard; “this is from my publisher, who has just sent me the price of
that poem in one-syllable verse which I began yonder.”

“Ah, indeed,” said D’Artagnan. “Well, your publisher is very generous,
my dear Aramis, that’s all I can say.”

“How, monsieur?” cried Bazin, “a poem sell so dear as that! It is
incredible! Oh, monsieur, you can write as much as you like; you may
become equal to Monsieur de Voiture and Monsieur de Benserade. I like
that. A poet is as good as an abbé. Ah! Monsieur Aramis, become a poet,
I beg of you.”

“Bazin, my friend,” said Aramis, “I believe you meddle with my
conversation.”

Bazin perceived he was wrong; he bowed and went out.

“Ah!” said D’Artagnan with a smile, “you sell your productions at their
weight in gold. You are very fortunate, my friend; but take care or you
will lose that letter which is peeping from your doublet, and which
also comes, no doubt, from your publisher.”

Aramis blushed to the eyes, crammed in the letter, and re-buttoned his
doublet.

“My dear D’Artagnan,” said he, “if you please, we will join our
friends; as I am rich, we will today begin to dine together again,
expecting that you will be rich in your turn.”

“My faith!” said D’Artagnan, with great pleasure. “It is long since we
have had a good dinner; and I, for my part, have a somewhat hazardous
expedition for this evening, and shall not be sorry, I confess, to
fortify myself with a few glasses of good old Burgundy.”

“Agreed, as to the old Burgundy; I have no objection to that,” said
Aramis, from whom the letter and the gold had removed, as by magic, his
ideas of conversion.

And having put three or four double pistoles into his pocket to answer
the needs of the moment, he placed the others in the ebony box, inlaid
with mother of pearl, in which was the famous handkerchief which served
him as a talisman.

The two friends repaired to Athos’s, and he, faithful to his vow of not
going out, took upon him to order dinner to be brought to them. As he
was perfectly acquainted with the details of gastronomy, D’Artagnan and
Aramis made no objection to abandoning this important care to him.

They went to find Porthos, and at the corner of the Rue Bac met
Mousqueton, who, with a most pitiable air, was driving before him a
mule and a horse.

D’Artagnan uttered a cry of surprise, which was not quite free from
joy.

“Ah, my yellow horse,” cried he. “Aramis, look at that horse!”

“Oh, the frightful brute!” said Aramis.

“Ah, my dear,” replied D’Artagnan, “upon that very horse I came to
Paris.”

“What, does Monsieur know this horse?” said Mousqueton.

“It is of an original color,” said Aramis; “I never saw one with such a
hide in my life.”

“I can well believe it,” replied D’Artagnan, “and that was why I got
three crowns for him. It must have been for his hide, for, _certes_,
the carcass is not worth eighteen livres. But how did this horse come
into your hands, Mousqueton?”

“Pray,” said the lackey, “say nothing about it, monsieur; it is a
frightful trick of the husband of our duchess!”

“How is that, Mousqueton?”

“Why, we are looked upon with a rather favorable eye by a lady of
quality, the Duchesse de—but, your pardon; my master has commanded me
to be discreet. She had forced us to accept a little souvenir, a
magnificent Spanish _genet_ and an Andalusian mule, which were
beautiful to look upon. The husband heard of the affair; on their way
he confiscated the two magnificent beasts which were being sent to us,
and substituted these horrible animals.”

“Which you are taking back to him?” said D’Artagnan.

“Exactly!” replied Mousqueton. “You may well believe that we will not
accept such steeds as these in exchange for those which had been
promised to us.”

“No, _pardieu;_ though I should like to have seen Porthos on my yellow
horse. That would give me an idea of how I looked when I arrived in
Paris. But don’t let us hinder you, Mousqueton; go and perform your
master’s orders. Is he at home?”

“Yes, monsieur,” said Mousqueton, “but in a very ill humor. Get up!”

He continued his way toward the Quai des Grands Augustins, while the
two friends went to ring at the bell of the unfortunate Porthos. He,
having seen them crossing the yard, took care not to answer, and they
rang in vain.

Meanwhile Mousqueton continued on his way, and crossing the Pont Neuf,
still driving the two sorry animals before him, he reached the Rue aux
Ours. Arrived there, he fastened, according to the orders of his
master, both horse and mule to the knocker of the procurator’s door;
then, without taking any thought for their future, he returned to
Porthos, and told him that his commission was completed.

In a short time the two unfortunate beasts, who had not eaten anything
since the morning, made such a noise in raising and letting fall the
knocker that the procurator ordered his errand boy to go and inquire in
the neighborhood to whom this horse and mule belonged.

Mme. Coquenard recognized her present, and could not at first
comprehend this restitution; but the visit of Porthos soon enlightened
her. The anger which fired the eyes of the Musketeer, in spite of his
efforts to suppress it, terrified his sensitive inamorata. In fact,
Mousqueton had not concealed from his master that he had met D’Artagnan
and Aramis, and that D’Artagnan in the yellow horse had recognized the
Béarnese pony upon which he had come to Paris, and which he had sold
for three crowns.

Porthos went away after having appointed a meeting with the
procurator’s wife in the cloister of St. Magloire. The procurator,
seeing he was going, invited him to dinner—an invitation which the
Musketeer refused with a majestic air.

Mme. Coquenard repaired trembling to the cloister of St. Magloire, for
she guessed the reproaches that awaited her there; but she was
fascinated by the lofty airs of Porthos.

All that which a man wounded in his self-love could let fall in the
shape of imprecations and reproaches upon the head of a woman Porthos
let fall upon the bowed head of the procurator’s wife.

“Alas,” said she, “I did all for the best! One of our clients is a
horsedealer; he owes money to the office, and is backward in his pay. I
took the mule and the horse for what he owed us; he assured me that
they were two noble steeds.”

“Well, madame,” said Porthos, “if he owed you more than five crowns,
your horsedealer is a thief.”

“There is no harm in trying to buy things cheap, Monsieur Porthos,”
said the procurator’s wife, seeking to excuse herself.

“No, madame; but they who so assiduously try to buy things cheap ought
to permit others to seek more generous friends.” And Porthos, turning
on his heel, made a step to retire.

“Monsieur Porthos! Monsieur Porthos!” cried the procurator’s wife. “I
have been wrong; I see it. I ought not to have driven a bargain when it
was to equip a cavalier like you.”

Porthos, without reply, retreated a second step. The procurator’s wife
fancied she saw him in a brilliant cloud, all surrounded by duchesses
and marchionesses, who cast bags of money at his feet.

“Stop, in the name of heaven, Monsieur Porthos!” cried she. “Stop, and
let us talk.”

“Talking with you brings me misfortune,” said Porthos.

“But, tell me, what do you ask?”

“Nothing; for that amounts to the same thing as if I asked you for
something.”

The procurator’s wife hung upon the arm of Porthos, and in the violence
of her grief she cried out, “Monsieur Porthos, I am ignorant of all
such matters! How should I know what a horse is? How should I know what
horse furniture is?”

“You should have left it to me, then, madame, who know what they are;
but you wished to be frugal, and consequently to lend at usury.”

“It was wrong, Monsieur Porthos; but I will repair that wrong, upon my
word of honor.”

“How so?” asked the Musketeer.

“Listen. This evening M. Coquenard is going to the house of the Duc de
Chaulnes, who has sent for him. It is for a consultation, which will
last three hours at least. Come! We shall be alone, and can make up our
accounts.”

“In good time. Now you talk, my dear.”

“You pardon me?”

“We shall see,” said Porthos, majestically; and the two separated
saying, “Till this evening.”

“The devil!” thought Porthos, as he walked away, “it appears I am
getting nearer to Monsieur Coquenard’s strongbox at last.”




Chapter XXXV.
A GASCON A MATCH FOR CUPID


The evening so impatiently waited for by Porthos and by D’Artagnan at
last arrived.

As was his custom, D’Artagnan presented himself at Milady’s at about
nine o’clock. He found her in a charming humor. Never had he been so
well received. Our Gascon knew, by the first glance of his eye, that
his billet had been delivered, and that this billet had had its effect.

Kitty entered to bring some sherbet. Her mistress put on a charming
face, and smiled on her graciously; but alas! the poor girl was so sad
that she did not even notice Milady’s condescension.

D’Artagnan looked at the two women, one after the other, and was forced
to acknowledge that in his opinion Dame Nature had made a mistake in
their formation. To the great lady she had given a heart vile and
venal; to the _soubrette_ she had given the heart of a duchess.

At ten o’clock Milady began to appear restless. D’Artagnan knew what
she wanted. She looked at the clock, rose, reseated herself, smiled at
D’Artagnan with an air which said, “You are very amiable, no doubt, but
you would be _charming_ if you would only depart.”

D’Artagnan rose and took his hat; Milady gave him her hand to kiss. The
young man felt her press his hand, and comprehended that this was a
sentiment, not of coquetry, but of gratitude because of his departure.

“She loves him devilishly,” he murmured. Then he went out.

This time Kitty was nowhere waiting for him; neither in the
antechamber, nor in the corridor, nor beneath the great door. It was
necessary that D’Artagnan should find alone the staircase and the
little chamber. She heard him enter, but she did not raise her head.
The young man went to her and took her hands; then she sobbed aloud.

As D’Artagnan had presumed, on receiving his letter, Milady in a
delirium of joy had told her servant everything; and by way of
recompense for the manner in which she had this time executed the
commission, she had given Kitty a purse.

Returning to her own room, Kitty had thrown the purse into a corner,
where it lay open, disgorging three or four gold pieces on the carpet.
The poor girl, under the caresses of D’Artagnan, lifted her head.
D’Artagnan himself was frightened by the change in her countenance. She
joined her hands with a suppliant air, but without venturing to speak a
word. As little sensitive as was the heart of D’Artagnan, he was
touched by this mute sorrow; but he held too tenaciously to his
projects, above all to this one, to change the program which he had
laid out in advance. He did not therefore allow her any hope that he
would flinch; only he represented his action as one of simple
vengeance.

For the rest this vengeance was very easy; for Milady, doubtless to
conceal her blushes from her lover, had ordered Kitty to extinguish all
the lights in the apartment, and even in the little chamber itself.
Before daybreak M. de Wardes must take his departure, still in
obscurity.

Presently they heard Milady retire to her room. D’Artagnan slipped into
the wardrobe. Hardly was he concealed when the little bell sounded.
Kitty went to her mistress, and did not leave the door open; but the
partition was so thin that one could hear nearly all that passed
between the two women.

Milady seemed overcome with joy, and made Kitty repeat the smallest
details of the pretended interview of the _soubrette_ with De Wardes
when he received the letter; how he had responded; what was the
expression of his face; if he seemed very amorous. And to all these
questions poor Kitty, forced to put on a pleasant face, responded in a
stifled voice whose dolorous accent her mistress did not however
remark, solely because happiness is egotistical.

Finally, as the hour for her interview with the count approached,
Milady had everything about her darkened, and ordered Kitty to return
to her own chamber, and introduce De Wardes whenever he presented
himself.

Kitty’s detention was not long. Hardly had D’Artagnan seen, through a
crevice in his closet, that the whole apartment was in obscurity, than
he slipped out of his concealment, at the very moment when Kitty
reclosed the door of communication.

“What is that noise?” demanded Milady.

“It is I,” said D’Artagnan in a subdued voice, “I, the Comte de
Wardes.”

“Oh, my God, my God!” murmured Kitty, “he has not even waited for the
hour he himself named!”

“Well,” said Milady, in a trembling voice, “why do you not enter?
Count, Count,” added she, “you know that I wait for you.”

At this appeal D’Artagnan drew Kitty quietly away, and slipped into the
chamber.

If rage or sorrow ever torture the heart, it is when a lover receives
under a name which is not his own protestations of love addressed to
his happy rival. D’Artagnan was in a dolorous situation which he had
not foreseen. Jealousy gnawed his heart; and he suffered almost as much
as poor Kitty, who at that very moment was crying in the next chamber.

“Yes, Count,” said Milady, in her softest voice, and pressing his hand
in her own, “I am happy in the love which your looks and your words
have expressed to me every time we have met. I also—I love you. Oh,
tomorrow, tomorrow, I must have some pledge from you which will prove
that you think of me; and that you may not forget me, take this!” and
she slipped a ring from her finger onto D’Artagnan’s. D’Artagnan
remembered having seen this ring on the finger of Milady; it was a
magnificent sapphire, encircled with brilliants.

The first movement of D’Artagnan was to return it, but Milady added,
“No, no! Keep that ring for love of me. Besides, in accepting it,” she
added, in a voice full of emotion, “you render me a much greater
service than you imagine.”

“This woman is full of mysteries,” murmured D’Artagnan to himself. At
that instant he felt himself ready to reveal all. He even opened his
mouth to tell Milady who he was, and with what a revengeful purpose he
had come; but she added, “Poor angel, whom that monster of a Gascon
barely failed to kill.”

The monster was himself.

“Oh,” continued Milady, “do your wounds still make you suffer?”

“Yes, much,” said D’Artagnan, who did not well know how to answer.

“Be tranquil,” murmured Milady; “I will avenge you—and cruelly!”

“_Peste!_” said D’Artagnan to himself, “the moment for confidences has
not yet come.”

It took some time for D’Artagnan to resume this little dialogue; but
then all the ideas of vengeance which he had brought with him had
completely vanished. This woman exercised over him an unaccountable
power; he hated and adored her at the same time. He would not have
believed that two sentiments so opposite could dwell in the same heart,
and by their union constitute a passion so strange, and as it were,
diabolical.

Presently it sounded one o’clock. It was necessary to separate.
D’Artagnan at the moment of quitting Milady felt only the liveliest
regret at the parting; and as they addressed each other in a
reciprocally passionate adieu, another interview was arranged for the
following week.

Poor Kitty hoped to speak a few words to D’Artagnan when he passed
through her chamber; but Milady herself reconducted him through the
darkness, and only quit him at the staircase.

The next morning D’Artagnan ran to find Athos. He was engaged in an
adventure so singular that he wished for counsel. He therefore told him
all.

“Your Milady,” said he, “appears to be an infamous creature, but not
the less you have done wrong to deceive her. In one fashion or another
you have a terrible enemy on your hands.”

While thus speaking Athos regarded with attention the sapphire set with
diamonds which had taken, on D’Artagnan’s finger, the place of the
queen’s ring, carefully kept in a casket.

“You notice my ring?” said the Gascon, proud to display so rich a gift
in the eyes of his friends.

“Yes,” said Athos, “it reminds me of a family jewel.”

“It is beautiful, is it not?” said D’Artagnan.

“Yes,” said Athos, “magnificent. I did not think two sapphires of such
a fine water existed. Have you traded it for your diamond?”

“No. It is a gift from my beautiful Englishwoman, or rather
Frenchwoman—for I am convinced she was born in France, though I have
not questioned her.”

“That ring comes from Milady?” cried Athos, with a voice in which it
was easy to detect strong emotion.

“Her very self; she gave it me last night. Here it is,” replied
D’Artagnan, taking it from his finger.

Athos examined it and became very pale. He tried it on his left hand;
it fit his finger as if made for it.

A shade of anger and vengeance passed across the usually calm brow of
this gentleman.

“It is impossible it can be she,” said he. “How could this ring come
into the hands of Milady Clarik? And yet it is difficult to suppose
such a resemblance should exist between two jewels.”

“Do you know this ring?” said D’Artagnan.

“I thought I did,” replied Athos; “but no doubt I was mistaken.” And he
returned D’Artagnan the ring without, however, ceasing to look at it.

“Pray, D’Artagnan,” said Athos, after a minute, “either take off that
ring or turn the mounting inside; it recalls such cruel recollections
that I shall have no head to converse with you. Don’t ask me for
counsel; don’t tell me you are perplexed what to do. But stop! let me
look at that sapphire again; the one I mentioned to you had one of its
faces scratched by accident.”

D’Artagnan took off the ring, giving it again to Athos.

Athos started. “Look,” said he, “is it not strange?” and he pointed out
to D’Artagnan the scratch he had remembered.

“But from whom did this ring come to you, Athos?”

“From my mother, who inherited it from her mother. As I told you, it is
an old family jewel.”

“And you—sold it?” asked D’Artagnan, hesitatingly.

“No,” replied Athos, with a singular smile. “I gave it away in a night
of love, as it has been given to you.”

D’Artagnan became pensive in his turn; it appeared as if there were
abysses in Milady’s soul whose depths were dark and unknown. He took
back the ring, but put it in his pocket and not on his finger.

“D’Artagnan,” said Athos, taking his hand, “you know I love you; if I
had a son I could not love him better. Take my advice, renounce this
woman. I do not know her, but a sort of intuition tells me she is a
lost creature, and that there is something fatal about her.”

“You are right,” said D’Artagnan; “I will have done with her. I own
that this woman terrifies me.”

“Shall you have the courage?” said Athos.

“I shall,” replied D’Artagnan, “and instantly.”

“In truth, my young friend, you will act rightly,” said the gentleman,
pressing the Gascon’s hand with an affection almost paternal; “and God
grant that this woman, who has scarcely entered into your life, may not
leave a terrible trace in it!” And Athos bowed to D’Artagnan like a man
who wishes it understood that he would not be sorry to be left alone
with his thoughts.

On reaching home D’Artagnan found Kitty waiting for him. A month of
fever could not have changed her more than this one night of
sleeplessness and sorrow.

She was sent by her mistress to the false De Wardes. Her mistress was
mad with love, intoxicated with joy. She wished to know when her lover
would meet her a second night; and poor Kitty, pale and trembling,
awaited D’Artagnan’s reply. The counsels of his friend, joined to the
cries of his own heart, made him determine, now his pride was saved and
his vengeance satisfied, not to see Milady again. As a reply, he wrote
the following letter:

Do not depend upon me, madame, for the next meeting. Since my
convalescence I have so many affairs of this kind on my hands that I am
forced to regulate them a little. When your turn comes, I shall have
the honor to inform you of it. I kiss your hands.


COMTE DE WARDES


Not a word about the sapphire. Was the Gascon determined to keep it as
a weapon against Milady, or else, let us be frank, did he not reserve
the sapphire as a last resource for his outfit? It would be wrong to
judge the actions of one period from the point of view of another. That
which would now be considered as disgraceful to a gentleman was at that
time quite a simple and natural affair, and the younger sons of the
best families were frequently supported by their mistresses. D’Artagnan
gave the open letter to Kitty, who at first was unable to comprehend
it, but who became almost wild with joy on reading it a second time.
She could scarcely believe in her happiness; and D’Artagnan was forced
to renew with the living voice the assurances which he had written. And
whatever might be—considering the violent character of Milady—the
danger which the poor girl incurred in giving this billet to her
mistress, she ran back to the Place Royale as fast as her legs could
carry her.

The heart of the best woman is pitiless toward the sorrows of a rival.

Milady opened the letter with eagerness equal to Kitty’s in bringing
it; but at the first words she read she became livid. She crushed the
paper in her hand, and turning with flashing eyes upon Kitty, she
cried, “What is this letter?”

“The answer to Madame’s,” replied Kitty, all in a tremble.

“Impossible!” cried Milady. “It is impossible a gentleman could have
written such a letter to a woman.” Then all at once, starting, she
cried, “My God! can he have—” and she stopped. She ground her teeth;
she was of the color of ashes. She tried to go toward the window for
air, but she could only stretch forth her arms; her legs failed her,
and she sank into an armchair. Kitty, fearing she was ill, hastened
toward her and was beginning to open her dress; but Milady started up,
pushing her away. “What do you want with me?” said she, “and why do you
place your hand on me?”

“I thought that Madame was ill, and I wished to bring her help,”
responded the maid, frightened at the terrible expression which had
come over her mistress’s face.

“I faint? I? I? Do you take me for half a woman? When I am insulted I
do not faint; I avenge myself!”

And she made a sign for Kitty to leave the room.
