Chapter VI.
HIS MAJESTY KING LOUIS XIII.


This affair made a great noise. M. de Tréville scolded his Musketeers
in public, and congratulated them in private; but as no time was to be
lost in gaining the king, M. de Tréville hastened to report himself at
the Louvre. It was already too late. The king was closeted with the
cardinal, and M. de Tréville was informed that the king was busy and
could not receive him at that moment. In the evening M. de Tréville
attended the king’s gaming table. The king was winning; and as he was
very avaricious, he was in an excellent humor. Perceiving M. de
Tréville at a distance—

“Come here, Monsieur Captain,” said he, “come here, that I may growl at
you. Do you know that his Eminence has been making fresh complaints
against your Musketeers, and that with so much emotion, that this
evening his Eminence is indisposed? Ah, these Musketeers of yours are
very devils—fellows to be hanged.”

“No, sire,” replied Tréville, who saw at the first glance how things
would go, “on the contrary, they are good creatures, as meek as lambs,
and have but one desire, I’ll be their warranty. And that is that their
swords may never leave their scabbards but in your majesty’s service.
But what are they to do? The Guards of Monsieur the Cardinal are
forever seeking quarrels with them, and for the honor of the corps
even, the poor young men are obliged to defend themselves.”

“Listen to Monsieur de Tréville,” said the king; “listen to him! Would
not one say he was speaking of a religious community? In truth, my dear
Captain, I have a great mind to take away your commission and give it
to Mademoiselle de Chemerault, to whom I promised an abbey. But don’t
fancy that I am going to take you on your bare word. I am called Louis
the Just, Monsieur de Tréville, and by and by, by and by we will see.”

“Ah, sire; it is because I confide in that justice that I shall wait
patiently and quietly the good pleasure of your Majesty.”

“Wait, then, monsieur, wait,” said the king; “I will not detain you
long.”

In fact, fortune changed; and as the king began to lose what he had
won, he was not sorry to find an excuse for playing Charlemagne—if we
may use a gaming phrase of whose origin we confess our ignorance. The
king therefore arose a minute after, and putting the money which lay
before him into his pocket, the major part of which arose from his
winnings, “La Vieuville,” said he, “take my place; I must speak to
Monsieur de Tréville on an affair of importance. Ah, I had eighty louis
before me; put down the same sum, so that they who have lost may have
nothing to complain of. Justice before everything.”

Then turning toward M. de Tréville and walking with him toward the
embrasure of a window, “Well, monsieur,” continued he, “you say it is
his Eminence’s Guards who have sought a quarrel with your Musketeers?”

“Yes, sire, as they always do.”

“And how did the thing happen? Let us see, for you know, my dear
Captain, a judge must hear both sides.”

“Good Lord! In the most simple and natural manner possible. Three of my
best soldiers, whom your Majesty knows by name, and whose devotedness
you have more than once appreciated, and who have, I dare affirm to the
king, his service much at heart—three of my best soldiers, I say,
Athos, Porthos, and Aramis, had made a party of pleasure with a young
fellow from Gascony, whom I had introduced to them the same morning.
The party was to take place at St. Germain, I believe, and they had
appointed to meet at the Carmes-Deschaux, when they were disturbed by
de Jussac, Cahusac, Bicarat, and two other Guardsmen, who certainly did
not go there in such a numerous company without some ill intention
against the edicts.”

“Ah, ah! You incline me to think so,” said the king. “There is no doubt
they went thither to fight themselves.”

“I do not accuse them, sire; but I leave your Majesty to judge what
five armed men could possibly be going to do in such a deserted place
as the neighborhood of the Convent des Carmes.”

“Yes, you are right, Tréville, you are right!”

“Then, upon seeing my Musketeers they changed their minds, and forgot
their private hatred for partisan hatred; for your Majesty cannot be
ignorant that the Musketeers, who belong to the king and nobody but the
king, are the natural enemies of the Guardsmen, who belong to the
cardinal.”

“Yes, Tréville, yes,” said the king, in a melancholy tone; “and it is
very sad, believe me, to see thus two parties in France, two heads to
royalty. But all this will come to an end, Tréville, will come to an
end. You say, then, that the Guardsmen sought a quarrel with the
Musketeers?”

“I say that it is probable that things have fallen out so, but I will
not swear to it, sire. You know how difficult it is to discover the
truth; and unless a man be endowed with that admirable instinct which
causes Louis XIII. to be named the Just—”

“You are right, Tréville; but they were not alone, your Musketeers.
They had a youth with them?”

“Yes, sire, and one wounded man; so that three of the king’s
Musketeers—one of whom was wounded—and a youth not only maintained
their ground against five of the most terrible of the cardinal’s
Guardsmen, but absolutely brought four of them to earth.”

“Why, this is a victory!” cried the king, all radiant, “a complete
victory!”

“Yes, sire; as complete as that of the Bridge of Ce.”

“Four men, one of them wounded, and a youth, say you?”

“One hardly a young man; but who, however, behaved himself so admirably
on this occasion that I will take the liberty of recommending him to
your Majesty.”

“How does he call himself?”

“D’Artagnan, sire; he is the son of one of my oldest friends—the son of
a man who served under the king your father, of glorious memory, in the
civil war.”

“And you say this young man behaved himself well? Tell me how,
Tréville—you know how I delight in accounts of war and fighting.”

And Louis XIII. twisted his mustache proudly, placing his hand upon his
hip.

“Sire,” resumed Tréville, “as I told you, Monsieur d’Artagnan is little
more than a boy; and as he has not the honor of being a Musketeer, he
was dressed as a citizen. The Guards of the cardinal, perceiving his
youth and that he did not belong to the corps, invited him to retire
before they attacked.”

“So you may plainly see, Tréville,” interrupted the king, “it was they
who attacked?”

“That is true, sire; there can be no more doubt on that head. They
called upon him then to retire; but he answered that he was a Musketeer
at heart, entirely devoted to your Majesty, and that therefore he would
remain with Messieurs the Musketeers.”

“Brave young man!” murmured the king.

“Well, he did remain with them; and your Majesty has in him so firm a
champion that it was he who gave Jussac the terrible sword thrust which
has made the cardinal so angry.”

“He who wounded Jussac!” cried the king, “he, a boy! Tréville, that’s
impossible!”

“It is as I have the honor to relate it to your Majesty.”

“Jussac, one of the first swordsmen in the kingdom?”

“Well, sire, for once he found his master.”

“I will see this young man, Tréville—I will see him; and if anything
can be done—well, we will make it our business.”

“When will your Majesty deign to receive him?”

“Tomorrow, at midday, Tréville.”

“Shall I bring him alone?”

“No, bring me all four together. I wish to thank them all at once.
Devoted men are so rare, Tréville, by the back staircase. It is useless
to let the cardinal know.”

“Yes, sire.”

“You understand, Tréville—an edict is still an edict, it is forbidden
to fight, after all.”

“But this encounter, sire, is quite out of the ordinary conditions of a
duel. It is a brawl; and the proof is that there were five of the
cardinal’s Guardsmen against my three Musketeers and Monsieur
d’Artagnan.”

“That is true,” said the king; “but never mind, Tréville, come still by
the back staircase.”

Tréville smiled; but as it was indeed something to have prevailed upon
this child to rebel against his master, he saluted the king
respectfully, and with this agreement, took leave of him.

That evening the three Musketeers were informed of the honor accorded
them. As they had long been acquainted with the king, they were not
much excited; but D’Artagnan, with his Gascon imagination, saw in it
his future fortune, and passed the night in golden dreams. By eight
o’clock in the morning he was at the apartment of Athos.

D’Artagnan found the Musketeer dressed and ready to go out. As the hour
to wait upon the king was not till twelve, he had made a party with
Porthos and Aramis to play a game at tennis in a tennis court situated
near the stables of the Luxembourg. Athos invited D’Artagnan to follow
them; and although ignorant of the game, which he had never played, he
accepted, not knowing what to do with his time from nine o’clock in the
morning, as it then scarcely was, till twelve.

The two Musketeers were already there, and were playing together.
Athos, who was very expert in all bodily exercises, passed with
D’Artagnan to the opposite side and challenged them; but at the first
effort he made, although he played with his left hand, he found that
his wound was yet too recent to allow of such exertion. D’Artagnan
remained, therefore, alone; and as he declared he was too ignorant of
the game to play it regularly they only continued giving balls to one
another without counting. But one of these balls, launched by Porthos’
herculean hand, passed so close to D’Artagnan’s face that he thought
that if, instead of passing near, it had hit him, his audience would
have been probably lost, as it would have been impossible for him to
present himself before the king. Now, as upon this audience, in his
Gascon imagination, depended his future life, he saluted Aramis and
Porthos politely, declaring that he would not resume the game until he
should be prepared to play with them on more equal terms, and went and
took his place near the cord and in the gallery.

Unfortunately for D’Artagnan, among the spectators was one of his
Eminence’s Guardsmen, who, still irritated by the defeat of his
companions, which had happened only the day before, had promised
himself to seize the first opportunity of avenging it. He believed this
opportunity was now come and addressed his neighbor: “It is not
astonishing that that young man should be afraid of a ball, for he is
doubtless a Musketeer apprentice.”

D’Artagnan turned round as if a serpent had stung him, and fixed his
eyes intensely upon the Guardsman who had just made this insolent
speech.

“_Pardieu_,” resumed the latter, twisting his mustache, “look at me as
long as you like, my little gentleman! I have said what I have said.”

“And as since that which you have said is too clear to require any
explanation,” replied D’Artagnan, in a low voice, “I beg you to follow
me.”

“And when?” asked the Guardsman, with the same jeering air.

“At once, if you please.”

“And you know who I am, without doubt?”

“I? I am completely ignorant; nor does it much disquiet me.”

“You’re in the wrong there; for if you knew my name, perhaps you would
not be so pressing.”

“What is your name?”

“Bernajoux, at your service.”

“Well, then, Monsieur Bernajoux,” said D’Artagnan, tranquilly, “I will
wait for you at the door.”

“Go, monsieur, I will follow you.”

“Do not hurry yourself, monsieur, lest it be observed that we go out
together. You must be aware that for our undertaking, company would be
in the way.”

“That’s true,” said the Guardsman, astonished that his name had not
produced more effect upon the young man.

Indeed, the name of Bernajoux was known to all the world, D’Artagnan
alone excepted, perhaps; for it was one of those which figured most
frequently in the daily brawls which all the edicts of the cardinal
could not repress.

Porthos and Aramis were so engaged with their game, and Athos was
watching them with so much attention, that they did not even perceive
their young companion go out, who, as he had told the Guardsman of his
Eminence, stopped outside the door. An instant after, the Guardsman
descended in his turn. As D’Artagnan had no time to lose, on account of
the audience of the king, which was fixed for midday, he cast his eyes
around, and seeing that the street was empty, said to his adversary,
“My faith! It is fortunate for you, although your name is Bernajoux, to
have only to deal with an apprentice Musketeer. Never mind; be content,
I will do my best. On guard!”

“But,” said he whom D’Artagnan thus provoked, “it appears to me that
this place is badly chosen, and that we should be better behind the
Abbey St. Germain or in the Pré-aux-Clercs.”

“What you say is full of sense,” replied D’Artagnan; “but unfortunately
I have very little time to spare, having an appointment at twelve
precisely. On guard, then, monsieur, on guard!”

Bernajoux was not a man to have such a compliment paid to him twice. In
an instant his sword glittered in his hand, and he sprang upon his
adversary, whom, thanks to his great youthfulness, he hoped to
intimidate.

But D’Artagnan had on the preceding day served his apprenticeship.
Fresh sharpened by his victory, full of hopes of future favor, he was
resolved not to recoil a step. So the two swords were crossed close to
the hilts, and as D’Artagnan stood firm, it was his adversary who made
the retreating step; but D’Artagnan seized the moment at which, in this
movement, the sword of Bernajoux deviated from the line. He freed his
weapon, made a lunge, and touched his adversary on the shoulder.
D’Artagnan immediately made a step backward and raised his sword; but
Bernajoux cried out that it was nothing, and rushing blindly upon him,
absolutely spitted himself upon D’Artagnan’s sword. As, however, he did
not fall, as he did not declare himself conquered, but only broke away
toward the hôtel of M. de la Trémouille, in whose service he had a
relative, D’Artagnan was ignorant of the seriousness of the last wound
his adversary had received, and pressing him warmly, without doubt
would soon have completed his work with a third blow, when the noise
which arose from the street being heard in the tennis court, two of the
friends of the Guardsman, who had seen him go out after exchanging some
words with D’Artagnan, rushed, sword in hand, from the court, and fell
upon the conqueror. But Athos, Porthos, and Aramis quickly appeared in
their turn, and the moment the two Guardsmen attacked their young
companion, drove them back. Bernajoux now fell, and as the Guardsmen
were only two against four, they began to cry, “To the rescue! The
Hôtel de la Trémouille!” At these cries, all who were in the hôtel
rushed out and fell upon the four companions, who on their side cried
aloud, “To the rescue, Musketeers!”

This cry was generally heeded; for the Musketeers were known to be
enemies of the cardinal, and were beloved on account of the hatred they
bore to his Eminence. Thus the soldiers of other companies than those
which belonged to the Red Duke, as Aramis had called him, often took
part with the king’s Musketeers in these quarrels. Of three Guardsmen
of the company of M. Dessessart who were passing, two came to the
assistance of the four companions, while the other ran toward the hôtel
of M. de Tréville, crying, “To the rescue, Musketeers! To the rescue!”
As usual, this hôtel was full of soldiers of this company, who hastened
to the succor of their comrades. The _mêlée_ became general, but
strength was on the side of the Musketeers. The cardinal’s Guards and
M. de la Trémouille’s people retreated into the hôtel, the doors of
which they closed just in time to prevent their enemies from entering
with them. As to the wounded man, he had been taken in at once, and, as
we have said, in a very bad state.

Excitement was at its height among the Musketeers and their allies, and
they even began to deliberate whether they should not set fire to the
hôtel to punish the insolence of M. de la Trémouille’s domestics in
daring to make a _sortie_ upon the king’s Musketeers. The proposition
had been made, and received with enthusiasm, when fortunately eleven
o’clock struck. D’Artagnan and his companions remembered their
audience, and as they would very much have regretted that such an
opportunity should be lost, they succeeded in calming their friends,
who contented themselves with hurling some paving stones against the
gates; but the gates were too strong. They soon tired of the sport.
Besides, those who must be considered the leaders of the enterprise had
quit the group and were making their way toward the hôtel of M. de
Tréville, who was waiting for them, already informed of this fresh
disturbance.

“Quick to the Louvre,” said he, “to the Louvre without losing an
instant, and let us endeavor to see the king before he is prejudiced by
the cardinal. We will describe the thing to him as a consequence of the
affair of yesterday, and the two will pass off together.”

M. de Tréville, accompanied by the four young fellows, directed his
course toward the Louvre; but to the great astonishment of the captain
of the Musketeers, he was informed that the king had gone stag hunting
in the forest of St. Germain. M. de Tréville required this intelligence
to be repeated to him twice, and each time his companions saw his brow
become darker.

“Had his Majesty,” asked he, “any intention of holding this hunting
party yesterday?”

“No, your Excellency,” replied the valet de chambre, “the Master of the
Hounds came this morning to inform him that he had marked down a stag.
At first the king answered that he would not go; but he could not
resist his love of sport, and set out after dinner.”

“And the king has seen the cardinal?” asked M. de Tréville.

“In all probability he has,” replied the valet, “for I saw the horses
harnessed to his Eminence’s carriage this morning, and when I asked
where he was going, they told me, ‘To St. Germain.’”

“He is beforehand with us,” said M. de Tréville. “Gentlemen, I will see
the king this evening; but as to you, I do not advise you to risk doing
so.”

This advice was too reasonable, and moreover came from a man who knew
the king too well, to allow the four young men to dispute it. M. de
Tréville recommended everyone to return home and wait for news.

On entering his hôtel, M. de Tréville thought it best to be first in
making the complaint. He sent one of his servants to M. de la
Trémouille with a letter in which he begged of him to eject the
cardinal’s Guardsmen from his house, and to reprimand his people for
their audacity in making _sortie_ against the king’s Musketeers. But M.
de la Trémouille—already prejudiced by his esquire, whose relative, as
we already know, Bernajoux was—replied that it was neither for M. de
Tréville nor the Musketeers to complain, but, on the contrary, for him,
whose people the Musketeers had assaulted and whose hôtel they had
endeavored to burn. Now, as the debate between these two nobles might
last a long time, each becoming, naturally, more firm in his own
opinion, M. de Tréville thought of an expedient which might terminate
it quietly. This was to go himself to M. de la Trémouille.

He repaired, therefore, immediately to his hôtel, and caused himself to
be announced.

The two nobles saluted each other politely, for if no friendship
existed between them, there was at least esteem. Both were men of
courage and honor; and as M. de la Trémouille—a Protestant, and seeing
the king seldom—was of no party, he did not, in general, carry any bias
into his social relations. This time, however, his address, although
polite, was cooler than usual.

“Monsieur,” said M. de Tréville, “we fancy that we have each cause to
complain of the other, and I am come to endeavor to clear up this
affair.”

“I have no objection,” replied M. de la Trémouille, “but I warn you
that I am well informed, and all the fault is with your Musketeers.”

“You are too just and reasonable a man, monsieur!” said Tréville, “not
to accept the proposal I am about to make to you.”

“Make it, monsieur, I listen.”

“How is Monsieur Bernajoux, your esquire’s relative?”

“Why, monsieur, very ill indeed! In addition to the sword thrust in his
arm, which is not dangerous, he has received another right through his
lungs, of which the doctor says bad things.”

“But has the wounded man retained his senses?”

“Perfectly.”

“Does he talk?”

“With difficulty, but he can speak.”

“Well, monsieur, let us go to him. Let us adjure him, in the name of
the God before whom he must perhaps appear, to speak the truth. I will
take him for judge in his own cause, monsieur, and will believe what he
will say.”

M. de la Trémouille reflected for an instant; then as it was difficult
to suggest a more reasonable proposal, he agreed to it.

Both descended to the chamber in which the wounded man lay. The latter,
on seeing these two noble lords who came to visit him, endeavored to
raise himself up in his bed; but he was too weak, and exhausted by the
effort, he fell back again almost senseless.

M. de la Trémouille approached him, and made him inhale some salts,
which recalled him to life. Then M. de Tréville, unwilling that it
should be thought that he had influenced the wounded man, requested M.
de la Trémouille to interrogate him himself.

That happened which M. de Tréville had foreseen. Placed between life
and death, as Bernajoux was, he had no idea for a moment of concealing
the truth; and he described to the two nobles the affair exactly as it
had passed.

This was all that M. de Tréville wanted. He wished Bernajoux a speedy
convalescence, took leave of M. de la Trémouille, returned to his
hôtel, and immediately sent word to the four friends that he awaited
their company at dinner.

M. de Tréville entertained good company, wholly anticardinalist,
though. It may easily be understood, therefore, that the conversation
during the whole of dinner turned upon the two checks that his
Eminence’s Guardsmen had received. Now, as D’Artagnan had been the hero
of these two fights, it was upon him that all the felicitations fell,
which Athos, Porthos, and Aramis abandoned to him, not only as good
comrades, but as men who had so often had their turn that they could
very well afford him his.

Toward six o’clock M. de Tréville announced that it was time to go to
the Louvre; but as the hour of audience granted by his Majesty was
past, instead of claiming the _entrée_ by the back stairs, he placed
himself with the four young men in the antechamber. The king had not
yet returned from hunting. Our young men had been waiting about half an
hour, amid a crowd of courtiers, when all the doors were thrown open,
and his Majesty was announced.

At his announcement D’Artagnan felt himself tremble to the very marrow
of his bones. The coming instant would in all probability decide the
rest of his life. His eyes therefore were fixed in a sort of agony upon
the door through which the king must enter.

Louis XIII. appeared, walking fast. He was in hunting costume covered
with dust, wearing large boots, and holding a whip in his hand. At the
first glance, D’Artagnan judged that the mind of the king was stormy.

This disposition, visible as it was in his Majesty, did not prevent the
courtiers from ranging themselves along his pathway. In royal
antechambers it is worth more to be viewed with an angry eye than not
to be seen at all. The three Musketeers therefore did not hesitate to
make a step forward. D’Artagnan on the contrary remained concealed
behind them; but although the king knew Athos, Porthos, and Aramis
personally, he passed before them without speaking or looking—indeed,
as if he had never seen them before. As for M. de Tréville, when the
eyes of the king fell upon him, he sustained the look with so much
firmness that it was the king who dropped his eyes; after which his
Majesty, grumbling, entered his apartment.

“Matters go but badly,” said Athos, smiling; “and we shall not be made
Chevaliers of the Order this time.”

“Wait here ten minutes,” said M. de Tréville; “and if at the expiration
of ten minutes you do not see me come out, return to my hôtel, for it
will be useless for you to wait for me longer.”

The four young men waited ten minutes, a quarter of an hour, twenty
minutes; and seeing that M. de Tréville did not return, went away very
uneasy as to what was going to happen.

M. de Tréville entered the king’s cabinet boldly, and found his Majesty
in a very ill humor, seated on an armchair, beating his boot with the
handle of his whip. This, however, did not prevent his asking, with the
greatest coolness, after his Majesty’s health.

“Bad, monsieur, bad!” replied the king; “I am bored.”

This was, in fact, the worst complaint of Louis XIII., who would
sometimes take one of his courtiers to a window and say, “Monsieur
So-and-so, let us weary ourselves together.”

“How! Your Majesty is bored? Have you not enjoyed the pleasures of the
chase today?”

“A fine pleasure, indeed, monsieur! Upon my soul, everything
degenerates; and I don’t know whether it is the game which leaves no
scent, or the dogs that have no noses. We started a stag of ten
branches. We chased him for six hours, and when he was near being
taken—when St. Simon was already putting his horn to his mouth to sound
the _halali_—crack, all the pack takes the wrong scent and sets off
after a two-year-older. I shall be obliged to give up hunting, as I
have given up hawking. Ah, I am an unfortunate king, Monsieur de
Tréville! I had but one gerfalcon, and he died day before yesterday.”

“Indeed, sire, I wholly comprehend your disappointment. The misfortune
is great; but I think you have still a good number of falcons, sparrow
hawks, and tiercels.”

“And not a man to instruct them. Falconers are declining. I know no one
but myself who is acquainted with the noble art of venery. After me it
will all be over, and people will hunt with gins, snares, and traps. If
I had but the time to train pupils! But there is the cardinal always at
hand, who does not leave me a moment’s repose; who talks to me about
Spain, who talks to me about Austria, who talks to me about England!
Ah! _à propos_ of the cardinal, Monsieur de Tréville, I am vexed with
you!”

This was the chance at which M. de Tréville waited for the king. He
knew the king of old, and he knew that all these complaints were but a
preface—a sort of excitation to encourage himself—and that he had now
come to his point at last.

“And in what have I been so unfortunate as to displease your Majesty?”
asked M. de Tréville, feigning the most profound astonishment.

“Is it thus you perform your charge, monsieur?” continued the king,
without directly replying to de Tréville’s question. “Is it for this I
name you captain of my Musketeers, that they should assassinate a man,
disturb a whole quarter, and endeavor to set fire to Paris, without
your saying a word? But yet,” continued the king, “undoubtedly my haste
accuses you wrongfully; without doubt the rioters are in prison, and
you come to tell me justice is done.”

“Sire,” replied M. de Tréville, calmly, “on the contrary, I come to
demand it of you.”

“And against whom?” cried the king.

“Against calumniators,” said M. de Tréville.

“Ah! This is something new,” replied the king. “Will you tell me that
your three damned Musketeers, Athos, Porthos, and Aramis, and your
youngster from Béarn, have not fallen, like so many furies, upon poor
Bernajoux, and have not maltreated him in such a fashion that probably
by this time he is dead? Will you tell me that they did not lay siege
to the hôtel of the Duc de la Trémouille, and that they did not
endeavor to burn it?—which would not, perhaps, have been a great
misfortune in time of war, seeing that it is nothing but a nest of
Huguenots, but which is, in time of peace, a frightful example. Tell
me, now, can you deny all this?”

“And who told you this fine story, sire?” asked Tréville, quietly.

“Who has told me this fine story, monsieur? Who should it be but he who
watches while I sleep, who labors while I amuse myself, who conducts
everything at home and abroad—in France as in Europe?”

“Your Majesty probably refers to God,” said M. de Tréville; “for I know
no one except God who can be so far above your Majesty.”

“No, monsieur; I speak of the prop of the state, of my only servant, of
my only friend—of the cardinal.”

“His Eminence is not his holiness, sire.”

“What do you mean by that, monsieur?”

“That it is only the Pope who is infallible, and that this
infallibility does not extend to cardinals.”

“You mean to say that he deceives me; you mean to say that he betrays
me? You accuse him, then? Come, speak; avow freely that you accuse
him!”

“No, sire, but I say that he deceives himself. I say that he is
ill-informed. I say that he has hastily accused your Majesty’s
Musketeers, toward whom he is unjust, and that he has not obtained his
information from good sources.”

“The accusation comes from Monsieur de la Trémouille, from the duke
himself. What do you say to that?”

“I might answer, sire, that he is too deeply interested in the question
to be a very impartial witness; but so far from that, sire, I know the
duke to be a royal gentleman, and I refer the matter to him—but upon
one condition, sire.”

“What?”

“It is that your Majesty will make him come here, will interrogate him
yourself, _tête-à-tête_, without witnesses, and that I shall see your
Majesty as soon as you have seen the duke.”

“What, then! You will bind yourself,” cried the king, “by what Monsieur
de la Trémouille shall say?”

“Yes, sire.”

“You will accept his judgment?”

“Undoubtedly.”

“And you will submit to the reparation he may require?”

“Certainly.”

“La Chesnaye,” said the king. “La Chesnaye!”

Louis XIII.’s confidential valet, who never left the door, entered in
reply to the call.

“La Chesnaye,” said the king, “let someone go instantly and find
Monsieur de la Trémouille; I wish to speak with him this evening.”

“Your Majesty gives me your word that you will not see anyone between
Monsieur de la Trémouille and myself?”

“Nobody, by the faith of a gentleman.”

“Tomorrow, then, sire?”

“Tomorrow, monsieur.”

“At what o’clock, please your Majesty?”

“At any hour you will.”

“But in coming too early I should be afraid of awakening your Majesty.”

“Awaken me! Do you think I ever sleep, then? I sleep no longer,
monsieur. I sometimes dream, that’s all. Come, then, as early as you
like—at seven o’clock; but beware, if you and your Musketeers are
guilty.”

“If my Musketeers are guilty, sire, the guilty shall be placed in your
Majesty’s hands, who will dispose of them at your good pleasure. Does
your Majesty require anything further? Speak, I am ready to obey.”

“No, monsieur, no; I am not called Louis the Just without reason.
Tomorrow, then, monsieur—tomorrow.”

“Till then, God preserve your Majesty!”

However ill the king might sleep, M. de Tréville slept still worse. He
had ordered his three Musketeers and their companion to be with him at
half past six in the morning. He took them with him, without
encouraging them or promising them anything, and without concealing
from them that their luck, and even his own, depended upon the cast of
the dice.

Arrived at the foot of the back stairs, he desired them to wait. If the
king was still irritated against them, they would depart without being
seen; if the king consented to see them, they would only have to be
called.

On arriving at the king’s private antechamber, M. de Tréville found La
Chesnaye, who informed him that they had not been able to find M. de la
Trémouille on the preceding evening at his hôtel, that he returned too
late to present himself at the Louvre, that he had only that moment
arrived and that he was at that very hour with the king.

This circumstance pleased M. de Tréville much, as he thus became
certain that no foreign suggestion could insinuate itself between M. de
la Trémouille’s testimony and himself.

In fact, ten minutes had scarcely passed away when the door of the
king’s closet opened, and M. de Tréville saw M. de la Trémouille come
out. The duke came straight up to him, and said: “Monsieur de Tréville,
his Majesty has just sent for me in order to inquire respecting the
circumstances which took place yesterday at my hôtel. I have told him
the truth; that is to say, that the fault lay with my people, and that
I was ready to offer you my excuses. Since I have the good fortune to
meet you, I beg you to receive them, and to hold me always as one of
your friends.”

“Monsieur the Duke,” said M. de Tréville, “I was so confident of your
loyalty that I required no other defender before his Majesty than
yourself. I find that I have not been mistaken, and I thank you that
there is still one man in France of whom may be said, without
disappointment, what I have said of you.”

“That’s well said,” cried the king, who had heard all these compliments
through the open door; “only tell him, Tréville, since he wishes to be
considered your friend, that I also wish to be one of his, but he
neglects me; that it is nearly three years since I have seen him, and
that I never do see him unless I send for him. Tell him all this for
me, for these are things which a king cannot say for himself.”

“Thanks, sire, thanks,” said the duke; “but your Majesty may be assured
that it is not those—I do not speak of Monsieur de Tréville—whom your
Majesty sees at all hours of the day that are most devoted to you.”

“Ah! You have heard what I said? So much the better, Duke, so much the
better,” said the king, advancing toward the door. “Ah! It is you,
Tréville. Where are your Musketeers? I told you the day before
yesterday to bring them with you; why have you not done so?”

“They are below, sire, and with your permission La Chesnaye will bid
them come up.”

“Yes, yes, let them come up immediately. It is nearly eight o’clock,
and at nine I expect a visit. Go, Monsieur Duke, and return often. Come
in, Tréville.”

The Duke saluted and retired. At the moment he opened the door, the
three Musketeers and D’Artagnan, conducted by La Chesnaye, appeared at
the top of the staircase.

“Come in, my braves,” said the king, “come in; I am going to scold
you.”

The Musketeers advanced, bowing, D’Artagnan following closely behind
them.

“What the devil!” continued the king. “Seven of his Eminence’s Guards
placed _hors de combat_ by you four in two days! That’s too many,
gentlemen, too many! If you go on so, his Eminence will be forced to
renew his company in three weeks, and I to put the edicts in force in
all their rigor. One now and then I don’t say much about; but seven in
two days, I repeat, it is too many, it is far too many!”

“Therefore, sire, your Majesty sees that they are come, quite contrite
and repentant, to offer you their excuses.”

“Quite contrite and repentant! Hem!” said the king. “I place no
confidence in their hypocritical faces. In particular, there is one
yonder of a Gascon look. Come hither, monsieur.”

D’Artagnan, who understood that it was to him this compliment was
addressed, approached, assuming a most deprecating air.

“Why, you told me he was a young man? This is a boy, Tréville, a mere
boy! Do you mean to say that it was he who bestowed that severe thrust
at Jussac?”

“And those two equally fine thrusts at Bernajoux.”

“Truly!”

“Without reckoning,” said Athos, “that if he had not rescued me from
the hands of Cahusac, I should not now have the honor of making my very
humble reverence to your Majesty.”

“Why he is a very devil, this Béarnais! _Ventre-saint-gris_, Monsieur
de Tréville, as the king my father would have said. But at this sort of
work, many doublets must be slashed and many swords broken. Now,
Gascons are always poor, are they not?”

“Sire, I can assert that they have hitherto discovered no gold mines in
their mountains; though the Lord owes them this miracle in recompense
for the manner in which they supported the pretensions of the king your
father.”

“Which is to say that the Gascons made a king of me, myself, seeing
that I am my father’s son, is it not, Tréville? Well, happily, I don’t
say nay to it. La Chesnaye, go and see if by rummaging all my pockets
you can find forty pistoles; and if you can find them, bring them to
me. And now let us see, young man, with your hand upon your conscience,
how did all this come to pass?”

D’Artagnan related the adventure of the preceding day in all its
details; how, not having been able to sleep for the joy he felt in the
expectation of seeing his Majesty, he had gone to his three friends
three hours before the hour of audience; how they had gone together to
the tennis court, and how, upon the fear he had manifested lest he
receive a ball in the face, he had been jeered at by Bernajoux, who had
nearly paid for his jeer with his life, and M. de la Trémouille, who
had nothing to do with the matter, with the loss of his hôtel.

“This is all very well,” murmured the king, “yes, this is just the
account the duke gave me of the affair. Poor cardinal! Seven men in two
days, and those of his very best! But that’s quite enough, gentlemen;
please to understand, that’s enough. You have taken your revenge for
the Rue Férou, and even exceeded it; you ought to be satisfied.”

“If your Majesty is so,” said Tréville, “we are.”

“Oh, yes; I am,” added the king, taking a handful of gold from La
Chesnaye, and putting it into the hand of D’Artagnan. “Here,” said he,
“is a proof of my satisfaction.”

At this epoch, the ideas of pride which are in fashion in our days did
not prevail. A gentleman received, from hand to hand, money from the
king, and was not the least in the world humiliated. D’Artagnan put his
forty pistoles into his pocket without any scruple—on the contrary,
thanking his Majesty greatly.

“There,” said the king, looking at a clock, “there, now, as it is half
past eight, you may retire; for as I told you, I expect someone at
nine. Thanks for your devotedness, gentlemen. I may continue to rely
upon it, may I not?”

“Oh, sire!” cried the four companions, with one voice, “we would allow
ourselves to be cut to pieces in your Majesty’s service.”

“Well, well, but keep whole; that will be better, and you will be more
useful to me. Tréville,” added the king, in a low voice, as the others
were retiring, “as you have no room in the Musketeers, and as we have
besides decided that a novitiate is necessary before entering that
corps, place this young man in the company of the Guards of Monsieur
Dessessart, your brother-in-law. Ah, _pardieu_, Tréville! I enjoy
beforehand the face the cardinal will make. He will be furious; but I
don’t care. I am doing what is right.”

The king waved his hand to Tréville, who left him and rejoined the
Musketeers, whom he found sharing the forty pistoles with D’Artagnan.

The cardinal, as his Majesty had said, was really furious, so furious
that during eight days he absented himself from the king’s gaming
table. This did not prevent the king from being as complacent to him as
possible whenever he met him, or from asking in the kindest tone,
“Well, Monsieur Cardinal, how fares it with that poor Jussac and that
poor Bernajoux of yours?”




Chapter VII.
THE INTERIOR OF THE MUSKETEERS


When D’Artagnan was out of the Louvre, and consulted his friends upon
the use he had best make of his share of the forty pistoles, Athos
advised him to order a good repast at the Pomme-de-Pin, Porthos to
engage a lackey, and Aramis to provide himself with a suitable
mistress.

The repast was carried into effect that very day, and the lackey waited
at table. The repast had been ordered by Athos, and the lackey
furnished by Porthos. He was a Picard, whom the glorious Musketeer had
picked up on the Bridge Tournelle, making rings and plashing in the
water.

Porthos pretended that this occupation was proof of a reflective and
contemplative organization, and he had brought him away without any
other recommendation. The noble carriage of this gentleman, for whom he
believed himself to be engaged, had won Planchet—that was the name of
the Picard. He felt a slight disappointment, however, when he saw that
this place was already taken by a compeer named Mousqueton, and when
Porthos signified to him that the state of his household, though great,
would not support two servants, and that he must enter into the service
of D’Artagnan. Nevertheless, when he waited at the dinner given by his
master, and saw him take out a handful of gold to pay for it, he
believed his fortune made, and returned thanks to heaven for having
thrown him into the service of such a Crœsus. He preserved this
opinion even after the feast, with the remnants of which he repaired
his own long abstinence; but when in the evening he made his master’s
bed, the chimeras of Planchet faded away. The bed was the only one in
the apartment, which consisted of an antechamber and a bedroom.
Planchet slept in the antechamber upon a coverlet taken from the bed of
D’Artagnan, and which D’Artagnan from that time made shift to do
without.

Athos, on his part, had a valet whom he had trained in his service in a
thoroughly peculiar fashion, and who was named Grimaud. He was very
taciturn, this worthy signor. Be it understood we are speaking of
Athos. During the five or six years that he had lived in the strictest
intimacy with his companions, Porthos and Aramis, they could remember
having often seen him smile, but had never heard him laugh. His words
were brief and expressive, conveying all that was meant, and no more;
no embellishments, no embroidery, no arabesques. His conversation was a
matter of fact, without a single romance.

Although Athos was scarcely thirty years old, and was of great personal
beauty and intelligence of mind, no one knew whether he had ever had a
mistress. He never spoke of women. He certainly did not prevent others
from speaking of them before him, although it was easy to perceive that
this kind of conversation, in which he only mingled by bitter words and
misanthropic remarks, was very disagreeable to him. His reserve, his
roughness, and his silence made almost an old man of him. He had, then,
in order not to disturb his habits, accustomed Grimaud to obey him upon
a simple gesture or upon a simple movement of his lips. He never spoke
to him, except under the most extraordinary occasions.

Sometimes, Grimaud, who feared his master as he did fire, while
entertaining a strong attachment to his person and a great veneration
for his talents, believed he perfectly understood what he wanted, flew
to execute the order received, and did precisely the contrary. Athos
then shrugged his shoulders, and, without putting himself in a passion,
thrashed Grimaud. On these days he spoke a little.

Porthos, as we have seen, had a character exactly opposite to that of
Athos. He not only talked much, but he talked loudly, little caring, we
must render him that justice, whether anybody listened to him or not.
He talked for the pleasure of talking and for the pleasure of hearing
himself talk. He spoke upon all subjects except the sciences, alleging
in this respect the inveterate hatred he had borne to scholars from his
childhood. He had not so noble an air as Athos, and the commencement of
their intimacy often rendered him unjust toward that gentleman, whom he
endeavored to eclipse by his splendid dress. But with his simple
Musketeer’s uniform and nothing but the manner in which he threw back
his head and advanced his foot, Athos instantly took the place which
was his due and consigned the ostentatious Porthos to the second rank.
Porthos consoled himself by filling the antechamber of M. de Tréville
and the guardroom of the Louvre with the accounts of his love scrapes,
after having passed from professional ladies to military ladies, from
the lawyer’s dame to the baroness, there was question of nothing less
with Porthos than a foreign princess, who was enormously fond of him.

An old proverb says, “Like master, like man.” Let us pass, then, from
the valet of Athos to the valet of Porthos, from Grimaud to Mousqueton.

Mousqueton was a Norman, whose pacific name of Boniface his master had
changed into the infinitely more sonorous name of Mousqueton. He had
entered the service of Porthos upon condition that he should only be
clothed and lodged, though in a handsome manner; but he claimed two
hours a day to himself, consecrated to an employment which would
provide for his other wants. Porthos agreed to the bargain; the thing
suited him wonderfully well. He had doublets cut out of his old clothes
and cast-off cloaks for Mousqueton, and thanks to a very intelligent
tailor, who made his clothes look as good as new by turning them, and
whose wife was suspected of wishing to make Porthos descend from his
aristocratic habits, Mousqueton made a very good figure when attending
on his master.

As for Aramis, of whom we believe we have sufficiently explained the
character—a character which, like that of his companions, we shall be
able to follow in its development—his lackey was called Bazin. Thanks
to the hopes which his master entertained of someday entering into
orders, he was always clothed in black, as became the servant of a
churchman. He was a Berrichon, thirty-five or forty years old, mild,
peaceable, sleek, employing the leisure his master left him in the
perusal of pious works, providing rigorously for two a dinner of few
dishes, but excellent. For the rest, he was dumb, blind, and deaf, and
of unimpeachable fidelity.

And now that we are acquainted, superficially at least, with the
masters and the valets, let us pass on to the dwellings occupied by
each of them.

Athos dwelt in the Rue Férou, within two steps of the Luxembourg. His
apartment consisted of two small chambers, very nicely fitted up, in a
furnished house, the hostess of which, still young and still really
handsome, cast tender glances uselessly at him. Some fragments of past
splendor appeared here and there upon the walls of this modest lodging;
a sword, for example, richly embossed, which belonged by its make to
the times of Francis I, the hilt of which alone, encrusted with
precious stones, might be worth two hundred pistoles, and which,
nevertheless, in his moments of greatest distress Athos had never
pledged or offered for sale. It had long been an object of ambition for
Porthos. Porthos would have given ten years of his life to possess this
sword.

One day, when he had an appointment with a duchess, he endeavored even
to borrow it of Athos. Athos, without saying anything, emptied his
pockets, got together all his jewels, purses, aiguillettes, and gold
chains, and offered them all to Porthos; but as to the sword, he said
it was sealed to its place and should never quit it until its master
should himself quit his lodgings. In addition to the sword, there was a
portrait representing a nobleman of the time of Henry III., dressed with
the greatest elegance, and who wore the Order of the Holy Ghost; and
this portrait had certain resemblances of lines with Athos, certain
family likenesses which indicated that this great noble, a knight of
the Order of the King, was his ancestor.

Besides these, a casket of magnificent goldwork, with the same arms as
the sword and the portrait, formed a middle ornament to the
mantelpiece, and assorted badly with the rest of the furniture. Athos
always carried the key of this coffer about him; but he one day opened
it before Porthos, and Porthos was convinced that this coffer contained
nothing but letters and papers—love letters and family papers, no
doubt.

Porthos lived in an apartment, large in size and of very sumptuous
appearance, in the Rue du Vieux-Colombier. Every time he passed with a
friend before his windows, at one of which Mousqueton was sure to be
placed in full livery, Porthos raised his head and his hand, and said,
“That is my abode!” But he was never to be found at home; he never
invited anybody to go up with him, and no one could form an idea of
what his sumptuous apartment contained in the shape of real riches.

As to Aramis, he dwelt in a little lodging composed of a boudoir, an
eating room, and a bedroom, which room, situated, as the others were,
on the ground floor, looked out upon a little fresh green garden, shady
and impenetrable to the eyes of his neighbors.

With regard to D’Artagnan, we know how he was lodged, and we have
already made acquaintance with his lackey, Master Planchet.

D’Artagnan, who was by nature very curious—as people generally are who
possess the genius of intrigue—did all he could to make out who Athos,
Porthos, and Aramis really were (for under these pseudonyms each of
these young men concealed his family name)—Athos in particular, who, a
league away, savored of nobility. He addressed himself then to Porthos
to gain information respecting Athos and Aramis, and to Aramis in order
to learn something of Porthos.

Unfortunately Porthos knew nothing of the life of his silent companion
but what revealed itself. It was said Athos had met with great crosses
in love, and that a frightful treachery had forever poisoned the life
of this gallant man. What could this treachery be? All the world was
ignorant of it.

As to Porthos, except his real name (as was the case with those of his
two comrades), his life was very easily known. Vain and indiscreet, it
was as easy to see through him as through a crystal. The only thing to
mislead the investigator would have been belief in all the good things
he said of himself.

With respect to Aramis, though having the air of having nothing secret
about him, he was a young fellow made up of mysteries, answering little
to questions put to him about others, and having learned from him the
report which prevailed concerning the success of the Musketeer with a
princess, wished to gain a little insight into the amorous adventures
of his interlocutor. “And you, my dear companion,” said he, “you speak
of the baronesses, countesses, and princesses of others?”

“_Pardieu!_ I spoke of them because Porthos talked of them himself,
because he had paraded all these fine things before me. But be assured,
my dear Monsieur d’Artagnan, that if I had obtained them from any other
source, or if they had been confided to me, there exists no confessor
more discreet than myself.”

“Oh, I don’t doubt that,” replied D’Artagnan; “but it seems to me that
you are tolerably familiar with coats of arms—a certain embroidered
handkerchief, for instance, to which I owe the honor of your
acquaintance?”

This time Aramis was not angry, but assumed the most modest air and
replied in a friendly tone, “My dear friend, do not forget that I wish
to belong to the Church, and that I avoid all mundane opportunities.
The handkerchief you saw had not been given to me, but it had been
forgotten and left at my house by one of my friends. I was obliged to
pick it up in order not to compromise him and the lady he loves. As for
myself, I neither have, nor desire to have, a mistress, following in
that respect the very judicious example of Athos, who has none any more
than I have.”

“But what the devil! You are not a priest, you are a Musketeer!”

“A Musketeer for a time, my friend, as the cardinal says, a Musketeer
against my will, but a churchman at heart, believe me. Athos and
Porthos dragged me into this to occupy me. I had, at the moment of
being ordained, a little difficulty with—But that would not interest
you, and I am taking up your valuable time.”

“Not at all; it interests me very much,” cried D’Artagnan; “and at this
moment I have absolutely nothing to do.”

“Yes, but I have my breviary to repeat,” answered Aramis; “then some
verses to compose, which Madame d’Aiguillon begged of me. Then I must
go to the Rue St. Honoré in order to purchase some rouge for Madame de
Chevreuse. So you see, my dear friend, that if you are not in a hurry,
I am very much in a hurry.”

Aramis held out his hand in a cordial manner to his young companion,
and took leave of him.

Notwithstanding all the pains he took, D’Artagnan was unable to learn
any more concerning his three new-made friends. He formed, therefore,
the resolution of believing for the present all that was said of their
past, hoping for more certain and extended revelations in the future.
In the meanwhile, he looked upon Athos as an Achilles, Porthos as an
Ajax, and Aramis as a Joseph.

As to the rest, the life of the four young friends was joyous enough.
Athos played, and that as a rule unfortunately. Nevertheless, he never
borrowed a sou of his companions, although his purse was ever at their
service; and when he had played upon honor, he always awakened his
creditor by six o’clock the next morning to pay the debt of the
preceding evening.

Porthos had his fits. On the days when he won he was insolent and
ostentatious; if he lost, he disappeared completely for several days,
after which he reappeared with a pale face and thinner person, but with
money in his purse.

As to Aramis, he never played. He was the worst Musketeer and the most
unconvivial companion imaginable. He had always something or other to
do. Sometimes in the midst of dinner, when everyone, under the
attraction of wine and in the warmth of conversation, believed they had
two or three hours longer to enjoy themselves at table, Aramis looked
at his watch, arose with a bland smile, and took leave of the company,
to go, as he said, to consult a casuist with whom he had an
appointment. At other times he would return home to write a treatise,
and requested his friends not to disturb him.

At this Athos would smile, with his charming, melancholy smile, which
so became his noble countenance, and Porthos would drink, swearing that
Aramis would never be anything but a village _curé_.

Planchet, D’Artagnan’s valet, supported his good fortune nobly. He
received thirty sous per day, and for a month he returned to his
lodgings gay as a chaffinch, and affable toward his master. When the
wind of adversity began to blow upon the housekeeping of the Rue des
Fossoyeurs—that is to say, when the forty pistoles of King Louis XIII.
were consumed or nearly so—he commenced complaints which Athos thought
nauseous, Porthos indecent, and Aramis ridiculous. Athos counseled
D’Artagnan to dismiss the fellow; Porthos was of the opinion that he
should give him a good thrashing first; and Aramis contended that a
master should never attend to anything but the civilities paid to him.

“This is all very easy for you to say,” replied D’Artagnan, “for you,
Athos, who live like a dumb man with Grimaud, who forbid him to speak,
and consequently never exchange ill words with him; for you, Porthos,
who carry matters in such a magnificent style, and are a god to your
valet, Mousqueton; and for you, Aramis, who, always abstracted by your
theological studies, inspire your servant, Bazin, a mild, religious
man, with a profound respect; but for me, who am without any settled
means and without resources—for me, who am neither a Musketeer nor even
a Guardsman, what am I to do to inspire either the affection, the
terror, or the respect in Planchet?”

“This is serious,” answered the three friends; “it is a family affair.
It is with valets as with wives, they must be placed at once upon the
footing in which you wish them to remain. Reflect upon it.”

D’Artagnan did reflect, and resolved to thrash Planchet provisionally;
which he did with the conscientiousness that D’Artagnan carried into
everything. After having well beaten him, he forbade him to leave his
service without his permission. “For,” added he, “the future cannot
fail to mend; I inevitably look for better times. Your fortune is
therefore made if you remain with me, and I am too good a master to
allow you to miss such a chance by granting you the dismissal you
require.”

This manner of acting roused much respect for D’Artagnan’s policy among
the Musketeers. Planchet was equally seized with admiration, and said
no more about going away.

The life of the four young men had become fraternal. D’Artagnan, who
had no settled habits of his own, as he came from his province into the
midst of a world quite new to him, fell easily into the habits of his
friends.

They rose about eight o’clock in the winter, about six in summer, and
went to take the countersign and see how things went on at M. de
Tréville’s. D’Artagnan, although he was not a Musketeer, performed the
duty of one with remarkable punctuality. He went on guard because he
always kept company with whoever of his friends was on duty. He was
well known at the Hôtel of the Musketeers, where everyone considered
him a good comrade. M. de Tréville, who had appreciated him at the
first glance and who bore him a real affection, never ceased
recommending him to the king.

On their side, the three Musketeers were much attached to their young
comrade. The friendship which united these four men, and the need they
felt of seeing another three or four times a day, whether for dueling,
business, or pleasure, caused them to be continually running after one
another like shadows; and the Inseparables were constantly to be met
with seeking one another, from the Luxembourg to the Place St. Sulpice,
or from the Rue du Vieux-Colombier to the Luxembourg.

In the meanwhile the promises of M. de Tréville went on prosperously.
One fine morning the king commanded M. de Chevalier Dessessart to admit
D’Artagnan as a cadet in his company of Guards. D’Artagnan, with a
sigh, donned his uniform, which he would have exchanged for that of a
Musketeer at the expense of ten years of his existence. But M. de
Tréville promised this favor after a novitiate of two years—a novitiate
which might besides be abridged if an opportunity should present itself
for D’Artagnan to render the king any signal service, or to distinguish
himself by some brilliant action. Upon this promise D’Artagnan
withdrew, and the next day he began service.

Then it became the turn of Athos, Porthos, and Aramis to mount guard
with D’Artagnan when he was on duty. The company of M. le Chevalier
Dessessart thus received four instead of one when it admitted
D’Artagnan.




Chapter VIII.
CONCERNING A COURT INTRIGUE


In the meantime, the forty pistoles of King Louis XIII., like all other
things of this world, after having had a beginning had an end, and
after this end our four companions began to be somewhat embarrassed. At
first, Athos supported the association for a time with his own means.

Porthos succeeded him; and thanks to one of those disappearances to
which he was accustomed, he was able to provide for the wants of all
for a fortnight. At last it became Aramis’s turn, who performed it with
a good grace and who succeeded—as he said, by selling some theological
books—in procuring a few pistoles.

Then, as they had been accustomed to do, they had recourse to M. de
Tréville, who made some advances on their pay; but these advances could
not go far with three Musketeers who were already much in arrears and a
Guardsman who as yet had no pay at all.

At length when they found they were likely to be really in want, they
got together, as a last effort, eight or ten pistoles, with which
Porthos went to the gaming table. Unfortunately he was in a bad vein;
he lost all, together with twenty-five pistoles for which he had given
his word.

Then the inconvenience became distress. The hungry friends, followed by
their lackeys, were seen haunting the quays and Guard rooms, picking up
among their friends abroad all the dinners they could meet with; for
according to the advice of Aramis, it was prudent to sow repasts right
and left in prosperity, in order to reap a few in time of need.

Athos was invited four times, and each time took his friends and their
lackeys with him. Porthos had six occasions, and contrived in the same
manner that his friends should partake of them; Aramis had eight of
them. He was a man, as must have been already perceived, who made but
little noise, and yet was much sought after.

As to D’Artagnan, who as yet knew nobody in the capital, he only found
one chocolate breakfast at the house of a priest of his own province,
and one dinner at the house of a cornet of the Guards. He took his army
to the priest’s, where they devoured as much provision as would have
lasted him for two months, and to the cornet’s, who performed wonders;
but as Planchet said, “People do not eat at once for all time, even
when they eat a good deal.”

D’Artagnan thus felt himself humiliated in having only procured one
meal and a half for his companions—as the breakfast at the priest’s
could only be counted as half a repast—in return for the feasts which
Athos, Porthos, and Aramis had procured him. He fancied himself a
burden to the society, forgetting in his perfectly juvenile good faith
that he had fed this society for a month; and he set his mind actively
to work. He reflected that this coalition of four young, brave,
enterprising, and active men ought to have some other object than
swaggering walks, fencing lessons, and practical jokes, more or less
witty.

In fact, four men such as they were—four men devoted to one another,
from their purses to their lives; four men always supporting one
another, never yielding, executing singly or together the resolutions
formed in common; four arms threatening the four cardinal points, or
turning toward a single point—must inevitably, either subterraneously,
in open day, by mining, in the trench, by cunning, or by force, open
themselves a way toward the object they wished to attain, however well
it might be defended, or however distant it may seem. The only thing
that astonished D’Artagnan was that his friends had never thought of
this.

He was thinking by himself, and even seriously racking his brain to
find a direction for this single force four times multiplied, with
which he did not doubt, as with the lever for which Archimedes sought,
they should succeed in moving the world, when someone tapped gently at
his door. D’Artagnan awakened Planchet and ordered him to open it.

From this phrase, “D’Artagnan awakened Planchet,” the reader must not
suppose it was night, or that day was hardly come. No, it had just
struck four. Planchet, two hours before, had asked his master for some
dinner, and he had answered him with the proverb, “He who sleeps,
dines.” And Planchet dined by sleeping.

A man was introduced of simple mien, who had the appearance of a
tradesman. Planchet, by way of dessert, would have liked to hear the
conversation; but the citizen declared to D’Artagnan that, what he had
to say being important and confidential, he desired to be left alone
with him.

D’Artagnan dismissed Planchet, and requested his visitor to be seated.
There was a moment of silence, during which the two men looked at each
other, as if to make a preliminary acquaintance, after which D’Artagnan
bowed, as a sign that he listened.

“I have heard Monsieur d’Artagnan spoken of as a very brave young man,”
said the citizen; “and this reputation which he justly enjoys had
decided me to confide a secret to him.”

“Speak, monsieur, speak,” said D’Artagnan, who instinctively scented
something advantageous.

The citizen made a fresh pause and continued, “I have a wife who is
seamstress to the queen, monsieur, and who is not deficient in either
virtue or beauty. I was induced to marry her about three years ago,
although she had but very little dowry, because Monsieur Laporte, the
queen’s cloak bearer, is her godfather, and befriends her.”

“Well, monsieur?” asked D’Artagnan.

“Well!” resumed the citizen, “well, monsieur, my wife was abducted
yesterday morning, as she was coming out of her workroom.”

“And by whom was your wife abducted?”

“I know nothing surely, monsieur, but I suspect someone.”

“And who is the person whom you suspect?”

“A man who has pursued her a long time.”

“The devil!”

“But allow me to tell you, monsieur,” continued the citizen, “that I am
convinced that there is less love than politics in all this.”

“Less love than politics,” replied D’Artagnan, with a reflective air;
“and what do you suspect?”

“I do not know whether I ought to tell you what I suspect.”

“Monsieur, I beg you to observe that I ask you absolutely nothing. It
is you who have come to me. It is you who have told me that you had a
secret to confide in me. Act, then, as you think proper; there is still
time to withdraw.”

“No, monsieur, no; you appear to be an honest young man, and I will
have confidence in you. I believe, then, that it is not on account of
any intrigues of her own that my wife has been arrested, but because of
those of a lady much greater than herself.”

“Ah, ah! Can it be on account of the amours of Madame de Bois-Tracy?”
said D’Artagnan, wishing to have the air, in the eyes of the citizen,
of being posted as to court affairs.

“Higher, monsieur, higher.”

“Of Madame d’Aiguillon?”

“Still higher.”

“Of Madame de Chevreuse?”

“Higher, much higher.”

“Of the—” D’Artagnan checked himself.

“Yes, monsieur,” replied the terrified citizen, in a tone so low that
he was scarcely audible.

“And with whom?”

“With whom can it be, if not the Duke of—”

“The Duke of—”

“Yes, monsieur,” replied the citizen, giving a still fainter intonation
to his voice.

“But how do you know all this?”

“How do I know it?”

“Yes, how do you know it? No half-confidence, or—you understand!”

“I know it from my wife, monsieur—from my wife herself.”

“Who learns it from whom?”

“From Monsieur Laporte. Did I not tell you that she was the goddaughter
of Monsieur Laporte, the confidential man of the queen? Well, Monsieur
Laporte placed her near her Majesty in order that our poor queen might
at least have someone in whom she could place confidence, abandoned as
she is by the king, watched as she is by the cardinal, betrayed as she
is by everybody.”

“Ah, ah! It begins to develop itself,” said D’Artagnan.

“Now, my wife came home four days ago, monsieur. One of her conditions
was that she should come and see me twice a week; for, as I had the
honor to tell you, my wife loves me dearly—my wife, then, came and
confided to me that the queen at that very moment entertained great
fears.”

“Truly!”

“Yes. The cardinal, as it appears, pursues her and persecutes her more
than ever. He cannot pardon her the history of the Saraband. You know
the history of the Saraband?”

“_Pardieu!_ Know it!” replied D’Artagnan, who knew nothing about it,
but who wished to appear to know everything that was going on.

“So that now it is no longer hatred, but vengeance.”

“Indeed!”

“And the queen believes—”

“Well, what does the queen believe?”

“She believes that someone has written to the Duke of Buckingham in her
name.”

“In the queen’s name?”

“Yes, to make him come to Paris; and when once come to Paris, to draw
him into some snare.”

“The devil! But your wife, monsieur, what has she to do with all this?”

“Her devotion to the queen is known; and they wish either to remove her
from her mistress, or to intimidate her, in order to obtain her
Majesty’s secrets, or to seduce her and make use of her as a spy.”

“That is likely,” said D’Artagnan; “but the man who has abducted her—do
you know him?”

“I have told you that I believe I know him.”

“His name?”

“I do not know that; what I do know is that he is a creature of the
cardinal, his evil genius.”

“But you have seen him?”

“Yes, my wife pointed him out to me one day.”

“Has he anything remarkable about him by which one may recognize him?”

“Oh, certainly; he is a noble of very lofty carriage, black hair,
swarthy complexion, piercing eye, white teeth, and has a scar on his
temple.”

“A scar on his temple!” cried D’Artagnan; “and with that, white teeth,
a piercing eye, dark complexion, black hair, and haughty carriage—why,
that’s my man of Meung.”

“He is your man, do you say?”

“Yes, yes; but that has nothing to do with it. No, I am wrong. On the
contrary, that simplifies the matter greatly. If your man is mine, with
one blow I shall obtain two revenges, that’s all; but where to find
this man?”

“I know not.”

“Have you no information as to his abiding place?”

“None. One day, as I was conveying my wife back to the Louvre, he was
coming out as she was going in, and she showed him to me.”

“The devil! The devil!” murmured D’Artagnan; “all this is vague enough.
From whom have you learned of the abduction of your wife?”

“From Monsieur Laporte.”

“Did he give you any details?”

“He knew none himself.”

“And you have learned nothing from any other quarter?”

“Yes, I have received—”

“What?”

“I fear I am committing a great imprudence.”

“You always come back to that; but I must make you see this time that
it is too late to retreat.”

“I do not retreat, _mordieu!_” cried the citizen, swearing in order to
rouse his courage. “Besides, by the faith of Bonacieux—”

“You call yourself Bonacieux?” interrupted D’Artagnan.

“Yes, that is my name.”

“You said, then, by the word of Bonacieux. Pardon me for interrupting
you, but it appears to me that that name is familiar to me.”

“Possibly, monsieur. I am your landlord.”

“Ah, ah!” said D’Artagnan, half rising and bowing; “you are my
landlord?”

“Yes, monsieur, yes. And as it is three months since you have been
here, and though, distracted as you must be in your important
occupations, you have forgotten to pay me my rent—as, I say, I have not
tormented you a single instant, I thought you would appreciate my
delicacy.”

“How can it be otherwise, my dear Bonacieux?” replied D’Artagnan;
“trust me, I am fully grateful for such unparalleled conduct, and if,
as I told you, I can be of any service to you—”

“I believe you, monsieur, I believe you; and as I was about to say, by
the word of Bonacieux, I have confidence in you.”

“Finish, then, what you were about to say.”

The citizen took a paper from his pocket, and presented it to
D’Artagnan.

“A letter?” said the young man.

“Which I received this morning.”

D’Artagnan opened it, and as the day was beginning to decline, he
approached the window to read it. The citizen followed him.

“‘Do not seek your wife,’” read D’Artagnan; “‘she will be restored to
you when there is no longer occasion for her. If you make a single step
to find her you are lost.’

“That’s pretty positive,” continued D’Artagnan; “but after all, it is
but a menace.”

“Yes; but that menace terrifies me. I am not a fighting man at all,
monsieur, and I am afraid of the Bastille.”

“Hum!” said D’Artagnan. “I have no greater regard for the Bastille than
you. If it were nothing but a sword thrust, why then—”

“I have counted upon you on this occasion, monsieur.”

“Yes?”

“Seeing you constantly surrounded by Musketeers of a very superb
appearance, and knowing that these Musketeers belong to Monsieur de
Tréville, and were consequently enemies of the cardinal, I thought that
you and your friends, while rendering justice to your poor queen, would
be pleased to play his Eminence an ill turn.”

“Without doubt.”

“And then I have thought that considering three months’ lodging, about
which I have said nothing—”

“Yes, yes; you have already given me that reason, and I find it
excellent.”

“Reckoning still further, that as long as you do me the honor to remain
in my house I shall never speak to you about rent—”

“Very kind!”

“And adding to this, if there be need of it, meaning to offer you fifty
pistoles, if, against all probability, you should be short at the
present moment.”

“Admirable! You are rich then, my dear Monsieur Bonacieux?”

“I am comfortably off, monsieur, that’s all; I have scraped together
some such things as an income of two or three thousand crowns in the
haberdashery business, but more particularly in venturing some funds in
the last voyage of the celebrated navigator Jean Moquet; so that you
understand, monsieur—But!—” cried the citizen.

“What!” demanded D’Artagnan.

“Whom do I see yonder?”

“Where?”

“In the street, facing your window, in the embrasure of that door—a man
wrapped in a cloak.”

“It is he!” cried D’Artagnan and the citizen at the same time, each
having recognized his man.

“Ah, this time,” cried D’Artagnan, springing to his sword, “this time
he will not escape me!”

Drawing his sword from its scabbard, he rushed out of the apartment. On
the staircase he met Athos and Porthos, who were coming to see him.
They separated, and D’Artagnan rushed between them like a dart.

“Pah! Where are you going?” cried the two Musketeers in a breath.

“The man of Meung!” replied D’Artagnan, and disappeared.

D’Artagnan had more than once related to his friends his adventure with
the stranger, as well as the apparition of the beautiful foreigner, to
whom this man had confided some important missive.

The opinion of Athos was that D’Artagnan had lost his letter in the
skirmish. A gentleman, in his opinion—and according to D’Artagnan’s
portrait of him, the stranger must be a gentleman—would be incapable of
the baseness of stealing a letter.

Porthos saw nothing in all this but a love meeting, given by a lady to
a cavalier, or by a cavalier to a lady, which had been disturbed by the
presence of D’Artagnan and his yellow horse.

Aramis said that as these sorts of affairs were mysterious, it was
better not to fathom them.

They understood, then, from the few words which escaped from
D’Artagnan, what affair was in hand, and as they thought that
overtaking his man, or losing sight of him, D’Artagnan would return to
his rooms, they kept on their way.

When they entered D’Artagnan’s chamber, it was empty; the landlord,
dreading the consequences of the encounter which was doubtless about to
take place between the young man and the stranger, had, consistent with
the character he had given himself, judged it prudent to decamp.




Chapter IX.
D’ARTAGNAN SHOWS HIMSELF


As Athos and Porthos had foreseen, at the expiration of a half hour,
D’Artagnan returned. He had again missed his man, who had disappeared
as if by enchantment. D’Artagnan had run, sword in hand, through all
the neighboring streets, but had found nobody resembling the man he
sought for. Then he came back to the point where, perhaps, he ought to
have begun, and that was to knock at the door against which the
stranger had leaned; but this proved useless—for though he knocked ten
or twelve times in succession, no one answered, and some of the
neighbors, who put their noses out of their windows or were brought to
their doors by the noise, had assured him that that house, all the
openings of which were tightly closed, had not been inhabited for six
months.

While D’Artagnan was running through the streets and knocking at doors,
Aramis had joined his companions; so that on returning home D’Artagnan
found the reunion complete.

“Well!” cried the three Musketeers all together, on seeing D’Artagnan
enter with his brow covered with perspiration and his countenance upset
with anger.

“Well!” cried he, throwing his sword upon the bed, “this man must be
the devil in person; he has disappeared like a phantom, like a shade,
like a specter.”

“Do you believe in apparitions?” asked Athos of Porthos.

“I never believe in anything I have not seen, and as I never have seen
apparitions, I don’t believe in them.”

“The Bible,” said Aramis, “makes our belief in them a law; the ghost of
Samuel appeared to Saul, and it is an article of faith that I should be
very sorry to see any doubt thrown upon, Porthos.”

“At all events, man or devil, body or shadow, illusion or reality, this
man is born for my damnation; for his flight has caused us to miss a
glorious affair, gentlemen—an affair by which there were a hundred
pistoles, and perhaps more, to be gained.”

“How is that?” cried Porthos and Aramis in a breath.

As to Athos, faithful to his system of reticence, he contented himself
with interrogating D’Artagnan by a look.

“Planchet,” said D’Artagnan to his domestic, who just then insinuated
his head through the half-open door in order to catch some fragments of
the conversation, “go down to my landlord, Monsieur Bonacieux, and ask
him to send me half a dozen bottles of Beaugency wine; I prefer that.”

“Ah, ah! You have credit with your landlord, then?” asked Porthos.

“Yes,” replied D’Artagnan, “from this very day; and mind, if the wine
is bad, we will send him to find better.”

“We must use, and not abuse,” said Aramis, sententiously.

“I always said that D’Artagnan had the longest head of the four,” said
Athos, who, having uttered his opinion, to which D’Artagnan replied
with a bow, immediately resumed his accustomed silence.

“But come, what is this about?” asked Porthos.

“Yes,” said Aramis, “impart it to us, my dear friend, unless the honor
of any lady be hazarded by this confidence; in that case you would do
better to keep it to yourself.”

“Be satisfied,” replied D’Artagnan; “the honor of no one will have
cause to complain of what I have to tell.”

He then related to his friends, word for word, all that had passed
between him and his host, and how the man who had abducted the wife of
his worthy landlord was the same with whom he had had the difference at
the hostelry of the Jolly Miller.

“Your affair is not bad,” said Athos, after having tasted like a
connoisseur and indicated by a nod of his head that he thought the wine
good; “and one may draw fifty or sixty pistoles from this good man.
Then there only remains to ascertain whether these fifty or sixty
pistoles are worth the risk of four heads.”

“But observe,” cried D’Artagnan, “that there is a woman in the affair—a
woman carried off, a woman who is doubtless threatened, tortured
perhaps, and all because she is faithful to her mistress.”

“Beware, D’Artagnan, beware,” said Aramis. “You grow a little too warm,
in my opinion, about the fate of Madame Bonacieux. Woman was created
for our destruction, and it is from her we inherit all our miseries.”

At this speech of Aramis, the brow of Athos became clouded and he bit
his lips.

“It is not Madame Bonacieux about whom I am anxious,” cried D’Artagnan,
“but the queen, whom the king abandons, whom the cardinal persecutes,
and who sees the heads of all her friends fall, one after the other.”

“Why does she love what we hate most in the world, the Spaniards and
the English?”

“Spain is her country,” replied D’Artagnan; “and it is very natural
that she should love the Spanish, who are the children of the same soil
as herself. As to the second reproach, I have heard it said that she
does not love the English, but an Englishman.”

“Well, and by my faith,” said Athos, “it must be acknowledged that this
Englishman is worthy of being loved. I never saw a man with a nobler
air than his.”

“Without reckoning that he dresses as nobody else can,” said Porthos.
“I was at the Louvre on the day when he scattered his pearls; and,
_pardieu_, I picked up two that I sold for ten pistoles each. Do you
know him, Aramis?”

“As well as you do, gentlemen; for I was among those who seized him in
the garden at Amiens, into which Monsieur Putange, the queen’s equerry,
introduced me. I was at school at the time, and the adventure appeared
to me to be cruel for the king.”

“Which would not prevent me,” said D’Artagnan, “if I knew where the
Duke of Buckingham was, from taking him by the hand and conducting him
to the queen, were it only to enrage the cardinal, and if we could find
means to play him a sharp turn, I vow that I would voluntarily risk my
head in doing it.”

“And did the mercer*,” rejoined Athos, “tell you, D’Artagnan, that the
queen thought that Buckingham had been brought over by a forged
letter?”

* Haberdasher


“She is afraid so.”

“Wait a minute, then,” said Aramis.

“What for?” demanded Porthos.

“Go on, while I endeavor to recall circumstances.”

“And now I am convinced,” said D’Artagnan, “that this abduction of the
queen’s woman is connected with the events of which we are speaking,
and perhaps with the presence of Buckingham in Paris.”

“The Gascon is full of ideas,” said Porthos, with admiration.

“I like to hear him talk,” said Athos; “his dialect amuses me.”

“Gentlemen,” cried Aramis, “listen to this.”

“Listen to Aramis,” said his three friends.

“Yesterday I was at the house of a doctor of theology, whom I sometimes
consult about my studies.”

Athos smiled.

“He resides in a quiet quarter,” continued Aramis; “his tastes and his
profession require it. Now, at the moment when I left his house—”

Here Aramis paused.

“Well,” cried his auditors; “at the moment you left his house?”

Aramis appeared to make a strong inward effort, like a man who, in the
full relation of a falsehood, finds himself stopped by some unforeseen
obstacle; but the eyes of his three companions were fixed upon him,
their ears were wide open, and there were no means of retreat.

“This doctor has a niece,” continued Aramis.

“Ah, he has a niece!” interrupted Porthos.

“A very respectable lady,” said Aramis.

The three friends burst into laughter.

“Ah, if you laugh, if you doubt me,” replied Aramis, “you shall know
nothing.”

“We believe like Mohammedans, and are as mute as tombstones,” said
Athos.

“I will continue, then,” resumed Aramis. “This niece comes sometimes to
see her uncle; and by chance was there yesterday at the same time that
I was, and it was my duty to offer to conduct her to her carriage.”

“Ah! She has a carriage, then, this niece of the doctor?” interrupted
Porthos, one of whose faults was a great looseness of tongue. “A nice
acquaintance, my friend!”

“Porthos,” replied Aramis, “I have had the occasion to observe to you
more than once that you are very indiscreet; and that is injurious to
you among the women.”

“Gentlemen, gentlemen,” cried D’Artagnan, who began to get a glimpse of
the result of the adventure, “the thing is serious. Let us try not to
jest, if we can. Go on Aramis, go on.”

“All at once, a tall, dark gentleman—just like yours, D’Artagnan.”

“The same, perhaps,” said he.

“Possibly,” continued Aramis, “came toward me, accompanied by five or
six men who followed about ten paces behind him; and in the politest
tone, ‘Monsieur Duke,’ said he to me, ‘and you madame,’ continued he,
addressing the lady on my arm—”

“The doctor’s niece?”

“Hold your tongue, Porthos,” said Athos; “you are insupportable.”

“‘—will you enter this carriage, and that without offering the least
resistance, without making the least noise?’”

“He took you for Buckingham!” cried D’Artagnan.

“I believe so,” replied Aramis.

“But the lady?” asked Porthos.

“He took her for the queen!” said D’Artagnan.

“Just so,” replied Aramis.

“The Gascon is the devil!” cried Athos; “nothing escapes him.”

“The fact is,” said Porthos, “Aramis is of the same height, and
something of the shape of the duke; but it nevertheless appears to me
that the dress of a Musketeer—”

“I wore an enormous cloak,” said Aramis.

“In the month of July? The devil!” said Porthos. “Is the doctor afraid
that you may be recognized?”

“I can comprehend that the spy may have been deceived by the person;
but the face—”

“I had a large hat,” said Aramis.

“Oh, good lord,” cried Porthos, “what precautions for the study of
theology!”

“Gentlemen, gentlemen,” said D’Artagnan, “do not let us lose our time
in jesting. Let us separate, and let us seek the mercer’s wife—that is
the key of the intrigue.”

“A woman of such inferior condition! Can you believe so?” said Porthos,
protruding his lips with contempt.

“She is goddaughter to Laporte, the confidential valet of the queen.
Have I not told you so, gentlemen? Besides, it has perhaps been her
Majesty’s calculation to seek on this occasion for support so lowly.
High heads expose themselves from afar, and the cardinal is
longsighted.”

“Well,” said Porthos, “in the first place make a bargain with the
mercer, and a good bargain.”

“That’s useless,” said D’Artagnan; “for I believe if he does not pay
us, we shall be well enough paid by another party.”

At this moment a sudden noise of footsteps was heard upon the stairs;
the door was thrown violently open, and the unfortunate mercer rushed
into the chamber in which the council was held.

“Save me, gentlemen, for the love of heaven, save me!” cried he. “There
are four men come to arrest me. Save me! Save me!”

Porthos and Aramis arose.

“A moment,” cried D’Artagnan, making them a sign to replace in the
scabbard their half-drawn swords. “It is not courage that is needed; it
is prudence.”

“And yet,” cried Porthos, “we will not leave—”

“You will leave D’Artagnan to act as he thinks proper,” said Athos. “He
has, I repeat, the longest head of the four, and for my part I declare
that I will obey him. Do as you think best, D’Artagnan.”

At this moment the four Guards appeared at the door of the antechamber,
but seeing four Musketeers standing, and their swords by their sides,
they hesitated about going farther.

“Come in, gentlemen, come in,” called D’Artagnan; “you are here in my
apartment, and we are all faithful servants of the king and cardinal.”

“Then, gentlemen, you will not oppose our executing the orders we have
received?” asked one who appeared to be the leader of the party.

“On the contrary, gentlemen, we would assist you if it were necessary.”

“What does he say?” grumbled Porthos.

“You are a simpleton,” said Athos. “Silence!”

“But you promised me—” whispered the poor mercer.

“We can only save you by being free ourselves,” replied D’Artagnan, in
a rapid, low tone; “and if we appear inclined to defend you, they will
arrest us with you.”

“It seems, nevertheless—”

“Come, gentlemen, come!” said D’Artagnan, aloud; “I have no motive for
defending Monsieur. I saw him today for the first time, and he can tell
you on what occasion; he came to demand the rent of my lodging. Is that
not true, Monsieur Bonacieux? Answer!”

“That is the very truth,” cried the mercer; “but Monsieur does not tell
you—”

“Silence, with respect to me, silence, with respect to my friends;
silence about the queen, above all, or you will ruin everybody without
saving yourself! Come, come, gentlemen, remove the fellow.” And
D’Artagnan pushed the half-stupefied mercer among the Guards, saying to
him, “You are a shabby old fellow, my dear. You come to demand money of
me—of a Musketeer! To prison with him! Gentlemen, once more, take him
to prison, and keep him under key as long as possible; that will give
me time to pay him.”

The officers were full of thanks, and took away their prey. As they
were going down D’Artagnan laid his hand on the shoulder of their
leader.

“May I not drink to your health, and you to mine?” said D’Artagnan,
filling two glasses with the Beaugency wine which he had obtained from
the liberality of M. Bonacieux.

“That will do me great honor,” said the leader of the posse, “and I
accept thankfully.”

“Then to yours, monsieur—what is your name?”

“Boisrenard.”

“Monsieur Boisrenard.”

“To yours, my gentlemen! What is your name, in your turn, if you
please?”

“D’Artagnan.”

“To yours, monsieur.”

“And above all others,” cried D’Artagnan, as if carried away by his
enthusiasm, “to that of the king and the cardinal.”

The leader of the posse would perhaps have doubted the sincerity of
D’Artagnan if the wine had been bad; but the wine was good, and he was
convinced.

“What diabolical villainy you have performed here,” said Porthos, when
the officer had rejoined his companions and the four friends found
themselves alone. “Shame, shame, for four Musketeers to allow an
unfortunate fellow who cried for help to be arrested in their midst!
And a gentleman to hobnob with a bailiff!”

“Porthos,” said Aramis, “Athos has already told you that you are a
simpleton, and I am quite of his opinion. D’Artagnan, you are a great
man; and when you occupy Monsieur de Tréville’s place, I will come and
ask your influence to secure me an abbey.”

“Well, I am in a maze,” said Porthos; “do _you_ approve of what
D’Artagnan has done?”

“_Parbleu!_ Indeed I do,” said Athos; “I not only approve of what he
has done, but I congratulate him upon it.”

“And now, gentlemen,” said D’Artagnan, without stopping to explain his
conduct to Porthos, “All for one, one for all—that is our motto, is it
not?”

“And yet—” said Porthos.

“Hold out your hand and swear!” cried Athos and Aramis at once.

Overcome by example, grumbling to himself, nevertheless, Porthos
stretched out his hand, and the four friends repeated with one voice
the formula dictated by D’Artagnan:

“All for one, one for all.”

“That’s well! Now let us everyone retire to his own home,” said
D’Artagnan, as if he had done nothing but command all his life; “and
attention! For from this moment we are at feud with the cardinal.”




Chapter X.
A MOUSETRAP IN THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY


The invention of the mousetrap does not date from our days; as soon as
societies, in forming, had invented any kind of police, that police
invented mousetraps.

As perhaps our readers are not familiar with the slang of the Rue de
Jerusalem, and as it is fifteen years since we applied this word for
the first time to this thing, allow us to explain to them what is a
mousetrap.

When in a house, of whatever kind it may be, an individual suspected of
any crime is arrested, the arrest is held secret. Four or five men are
placed in ambuscade in the first room. The door is opened to all who
knock. It is closed after them, and they are arrested; so that at the
end of two or three days they have in their power almost all the
_habitués_ of the establishment. And that is a mousetrap.

The apartment of M. Bonacieux, then, became a mousetrap; and whoever
appeared there was taken and interrogated by the cardinal’s people. It
must be observed that as a separate passage led to the first floor, in
which D’Artagnan lodged, those who called on him were exempted from
this detention.

Besides, nobody came thither but the three Musketeers; they had all
been engaged in earnest search and inquiries, but had discovered
nothing. Athos had even gone so far as to question M. de Tréville—a
thing which, considering the habitual reticence of the worthy
Musketeer, had very much astonished his captain. But M. de Tréville
knew nothing, except that the last time he had seen the cardinal, the
king, and the queen, the cardinal looked very thoughtful, the king
uneasy, and the redness of the queen’s eyes donated that she had been
sleepless or tearful. But this last circumstance was not striking, as
the queen since her marriage had slept badly and wept much.

M. de Tréville requested Athos, whatever might happen, to be observant
of his duty to the king, but particularly to the queen, begging him to
convey his desires to his comrades.

As to D’Artagnan, he did not budge from his apartment. He converted his
chamber into an observatory. From his windows he saw all the visitors
who were caught. Then, having removed a plank from his floor, and
nothing remaining but a simple ceiling between him and the room
beneath, in which the interrogatories were made, he heard all that
passed between the inquisitors and the accused.

The interrogatories, preceded by a minute search operated upon the
persons arrested, were almost always framed thus: “Has Madame Bonacieux
sent anything to you for her husband, or any other person? Has Monsieur
Bonacieux sent anything to you for his wife, or for any other person?
Has either of them confided anything to you by word of mouth?”

“If they knew anything, they would not question people in this manner,”
said D’Artagnan to himself. “Now, what is it they want to know? Why,
they want to know if the Duke of Buckingham is in Paris, and if he has
had, or is likely to have, an interview with the queen.”

D’Artagnan held onto this idea, which, from what he had heard, was not
wanting in probability.

In the meantime, the mousetrap continued in operation, and likewise
D’Artagnan’s vigilance.

On the evening of the day after the arrest of poor Bonacieux, as Athos
had just left D’Artagnan to report at M. de Tréville’s, as nine o’clock
had just struck, and as Planchet, who had not yet made the bed, was
beginning his task, a knocking was heard at the street door. The door
was instantly opened and shut; someone was taken in the mousetrap.

D’Artagnan flew to his hole, laid himself down on the floor at full
length, and listened.

Cries were soon heard, and then moans, which someone appeared to be
endeavoring to stifle. There were no questions.

“The devil!” said D’Artagnan to himself. “It seems like a woman! They
search her; she resists; they use force—the scoundrels!”

In spite of his prudence, D’Artagnan restrained himself with great
difficulty from taking a part in the scene that was going on below.

“But I tell you that I am the mistress of the house, gentlemen! I tell
you I am Madame Bonacieux; I tell you I belong to the queen!” cried the
unfortunate woman.

“Madame Bonacieux!” murmured D’Artagnan. “Can I be so lucky as to find
what everybody is seeking for?”

The voice became more and more indistinct; a tumultuous movement shook
the partition. The victim resisted as much as a woman could resist four
men.

“Pardon, gentlemen—par—” murmured the voice, which could now only be
heard in inarticulate sounds.

“They are binding her; they are going to drag her away,” cried
D’Artagnan to himself, springing up from the floor. “My sword! Good, it
is by my side! Planchet!”

“Monsieur.”

“Run and seek Athos, Porthos and Aramis. One of the three will
certainly be at home, perhaps all three. Tell them to take arms, to
come here, and to run! Ah, I remember, Athos is at Monsieur de
Tréville’s.”

“But where are you going, monsieur, where are you going?”

“I am going down by the window, in order to be there the sooner,” cried
D’Artagnan. “You put back the boards, sweep the floor, go out at the
door, and run as I told you.”

“Oh, monsieur! Monsieur! You will kill yourself,” cried Planchet.

“Hold your tongue, stupid fellow,” said D’Artagnan; and laying hold of
the casement, he let himself gently down from the first story, which
fortunately was not very elevated, without doing himself the slightest
injury.

He then went straight to the door and knocked, murmuring, “I will go
myself and be caught in the mousetrap, but woe be to the cats that
shall pounce upon such a mouse!”

The knocker had scarcely sounded under the hand of the young man before
the tumult ceased, steps approached, the door was opened, and
D’Artagnan, sword in hand, rushed into the rooms of M. Bonacieux, the
door of which, doubtless acted upon by a spring, closed after him.

Then those who dwelt in Bonacieux’s unfortunate house, together with
the nearest neighbors, heard loud cries, stamping of feet, clashing of
swords, and breaking of furniture. A moment after, those who, surprised
by this tumult, had gone to their windows to learn the cause of it, saw
the door open, and four men, clothed in black, not _come_ out of it,
but _fly_, like so many frightened crows, leaving on the ground and on
the corners of the furniture, feathers from their wings; that is to
say, patches of their clothes and fragments of their cloaks.

D’Artagnan was conqueror—without much effort, it must be confessed, for
only one of the officers was armed, and even he defended himself for
form’s sake. It is true that the three others had endeavored to knock
the young man down with chairs, stools, and crockery; but two or three
scratches made by the Gascon’s blade terrified them. Ten minutes
sufficed for their defeat, and D’Artagnan remained master of the field
of battle.

The neighbors who had opened their windows, with the coolness peculiar
to the inhabitants of Paris in these times of perpetual riots and
disturbances, closed them again as soon as they saw the four men in
black flee—their instinct telling them that for the time all was over.
Besides, it began to grow late, and then, as today, people went to bed
early in the quarter of the Luxembourg.

On being left alone with Mme. Bonacieux, D’Artagnan turned toward her;
the poor woman reclined where she had been left, half-fainting upon an
armchair. D’Artagnan examined her with a rapid glance.

She was a charming woman of twenty-five or twenty-six years, with dark
hair, blue eyes, and a nose slightly turned up, admirable teeth, and a
complexion marbled with rose and opal. There, however, ended the signs
which might have confounded her with a lady of rank. The hands were
white, but without delicacy; the feet did not bespeak the woman of
quality. Happily, D’Artagnan was not yet acquainted with such niceties.

While D’Artagnan was examining Mme. Bonacieux, and was, as we have
said, close to her, he saw on the ground a fine cambric handkerchief,
which he picked up, as was his habit, and at the corner of which he
recognized the same cipher he had seen on the handkerchief which had
nearly caused him and Aramis to cut each other’s throat.

From that time, D’Artagnan had been cautious with respect to
handkerchiefs with arms on them, and he therefore placed in the pocket
of Mme. Bonacieux the one he had just picked up.

At that moment Mme. Bonacieux recovered her senses. She opened her
eyes, looked around her with terror, saw that the apartment was empty
and that she was alone with her liberator. She extended her hands to
him with a smile. Mme. Bonacieux had the sweetest smile in the world.

“Ah, monsieur!” said she, “you have saved me; permit me to thank you.”

“Madame,” said D’Artagnan, “I have only done what every gentleman would
have done in my place; you owe me no thanks.”

“Oh, yes, monsieur, oh, yes; and I hope to prove to you that you have
not served an ingrate. But what could these men, whom I at first took
for robbers, want with me, and why is Monsieur Bonacieux not here?”

“Madame, those men were more dangerous than any robbers could have
been, for they are the agents of the cardinal; and as to your husband,
Monsieur Bonacieux, he is not here because he was yesterday evening
conducted to the Bastille.”

“My husband in the Bastille!” cried Mme. Bonacieux. “Oh, my God! What
has he done? Poor dear man, he is innocence itself!”

And something like a faint smile lighted the still-terrified features
of the young woman.

“What has he done, madame?” said D’Artagnan. “I believe that his only
crime is to have at the same time the good fortune and the misfortune
to be your husband.”

“But, monsieur, you know then—”

“I know that you have been abducted, madame.”

“And by whom? Do you know him? Oh, if you know him, tell me!”

“By a man of from forty to forty-five years, with black hair, a dark
complexion, and a scar on his left temple.”

“That is he, that is he; but his name?”

“Ah, his name? I do not know that.”

“And did my husband know I had been carried off?”

“He was informed of it by a letter, written to him by the abductor
himself.”

“And does he suspect,” said Mme. Bonacieux, with some embarrassment,
“the cause of this event?”

“He attributed it, I believe, to a political cause.”

“I doubted from the first; and now I think entirely as he does. Then my
dear Monsieur Bonacieux has not suspected me a single instant?”

“So far from it, madame, he was too proud of your prudence, and above
all, of your love.”

A second smile, almost imperceptible, stole over the rosy lips of the
pretty young woman.

“But,” continued D’Artagnan, “how did you escape?”

“I took advantage of a moment when they left me alone; and as I had
known since morning the reason of my abduction, with the help of the
sheets I let myself down from the window. Then, as I believed my
husband would be at home, I hastened hither.”

“To place yourself under his protection?”

“Oh, no, poor dear man! I knew very well that he was incapable of
defending me; but as he could serve us in other ways, I wished to
inform him.”

“Of what?”

“Oh, that is not my secret; I must not, therefore, tell you.”

“Besides,” said D’Artagnan, “pardon me, madame, if, guardsman as I am,
I remind you of prudence—besides, I believe we are not here in a very
proper place for imparting confidences. The men I have put to flight
will return reinforced; if they find us here, we are lost. I have sent
for three of my friends, but who knows whether they were at home?”

“Yes, yes! You are right,” cried the affrighted Mme. Bonacieux; “let us
fly! Let us save ourselves.”

At these words she passed her arm under that of D’Artagnan, and urged
him forward eagerly.

“But whither shall we fly—whither escape?”

“Let us first withdraw from this house; afterward we shall see.”

The young woman and the young man, without taking the trouble to shut
the door after them, descended the Rue des Fossoyeurs rapidly, turned
into the Rue des Fossés-Monsieur-le-Prince, and did not stop till they
came to the Place St. Sulpice.

“And now what are we to do, and where do you wish me to conduct you?”
asked D’Artagnan.

“I am at quite a loss how to answer you, I admit,” said Mme. Bonacieux.
“My intention was to inform Monsieur Laporte, through my husband, in
order that Monsieur Laporte might tell us precisely what had taken
place at the Louvre in the last three days, and whether there is any
danger in presenting myself there.”

“But I,” said D’Artagnan, “can go and inform Monsieur Laporte.”

“No doubt you could, only there is one misfortune, and that is that
Monsieur Bonacieux is known at the Louvre, and would be allowed to
pass; whereas you are not known there, and the gate would be closed
against you.”

“Ah, bah!” said D’Artagnan; “you have at some wicket of the Louvre a
_concierge_ who is devoted to you, and who, thanks to a password,
would—”

Mme. Bonacieux looked earnestly at the young man.

“And if I give you this password,” said she, “would you forget it as
soon as you used it?”

“By my honor, by the faith of a gentleman!” said D’Artagnan, with an
accent so truthful that no one could mistake it.

“Then I believe you. You appear to be a brave young man; besides, your
fortune may perhaps be the result of your devotedness.”

“I will do, without a promise and voluntarily, all that I can do to
serve the king and be agreeable to the queen. Dispose of me, then, as a
friend.”

“But I—where shall I go meanwhile?”

“Is there nobody from whose house Monsieur Laporte can come and fetch
you?”

“No, I can trust nobody.”

“Stop,” said D’Artagnan; “we are near Athos’s door. Yes, here it is.”

“Who is this Athos?”

“One of my friends.”

“But if he should be at home and see me?”

“He is not at home, and I will carry away the key, after having placed
you in his apartment.”

“But if he should return?”

“Oh, he won’t return; and if he should, he will be told that I have
brought a woman with me, and that woman is in his apartment.”

“But that will compromise me sadly, you know.”

“Of what consequence? Nobody knows you. Besides, we are in a situation
to overlook ceremony.”

“Come, then, let us go to your friend’s house. Where does he live?”

“Rue Férou, two steps from here.”

“Let us go!”

Both resumed their way. As D’Artagnan had foreseen, Athos was not
within. He took the key, which was customarily given him as one of the
family, ascended the stairs, and introduced Mme. Bonacieux into the
little apartment of which we have given a description.

“You are at home,” said he. “Remain here, fasten the door inside, and
open it to nobody unless you hear three taps like this;” and he tapped
thrice—two taps close together and pretty hard, the other after an
interval, and lighter.

“That is well,” said Mme. Bonacieux. “Now, in my turn, let me give you
my instructions.”

“I am all attention.”

“Present yourself at the wicket of the Louvre, on the side of the Rue
de l’Echelle, and ask for Germain.”

“Well, and then?”

“He will ask you what you want, and you will answer by these two words,
‘Tours’ and ‘Bruxelles.’ He will at once put himself at your orders.”

“And what shall I command him?”

“To go and fetch Monsieur Laporte, the queen’s _valet de chambre_.”

“And when he shall have informed him, and Monsieur Laporte is come?”

“You will send him to me.”

“That is well; but where and how shall I see you again?”

“Do you wish to see me again?”

“Certainly.”

“Well, let that care be mine, and be at ease.”

“I depend upon your word.”

“You may.”

D’Artagnan bowed to Mme. Bonacieux, darting at her the most loving
glance that he could possibly concentrate upon her charming little
person; and while he descended the stairs, he heard the door closed and
double-locked. In two bounds he was at the Louvre; as he entered the
wicket of L’Echelle, ten o’clock struck. All the events we have
described had taken place within a half hour.

Everything fell out as Mme. Bonacieux prophesied. On hearing the
password, Germain bowed. In a few minutes, Laporte was at the lodge; in
two words D’Artagnan informed him where Mme. Bonacieux was. Laporte
assured himself, by having it twice repeated, of the accurate address,
and set off at a run. Hardly, however, had he taken ten steps before he
returned.

“Young man,” said he to D’Artagnan, “a suggestion.”

“What?”

“You may get into trouble by what has taken place.”

“You believe so?”

“Yes. Have you any friend whose clock is too slow?”

“Well?”

“Go and call upon him, in order that he may give evidence of your
having been with him at half past nine. In a court of justice that is
called an alibi.”

D’Artagnan found his advice prudent. He took to his heels, and was soon
at M. de Tréville’s; but instead of going into the saloon with the rest
of the crowd, he asked to be introduced to M. de Tréville’s office. As
D’Artagnan so constantly frequented the hôtel, no difficulty was made
in complying with his request, and a servant went to inform M. de
Tréville that his young compatriot, having something important to
communicate, solicited a private audience. Five minutes after, M. de
Tréville was asking D’Artagnan what he could do to serve him, and what
caused his visit at so late an hour.

“Pardon me, monsieur,” said D’Artagnan, who had profited by the moment
he had been left alone to put back M. de Tréville’s clock
three-quarters of an hour, “but I thought, as it was yet only
twenty-five minutes past nine, it was not too late to wait upon you.”

“Twenty-five minutes past nine!” cried M. de Tréville, looking at the
clock; “why, that’s impossible!”

“Look, rather, monsieur,” said D’Artagnan, “the clock shows it.”

“That’s true,” said M. de Tréville; “I believed it later. But what can
I do for you?”

Then D’Artagnan told M. de Tréville a long history about the queen. He
expressed to him the fears he entertained with respect to her Majesty;
he related to him what he had heard of the projects of the cardinal
with regard to Buckingham, and all with a tranquillity and candor of
which M. de Tréville was the more the dupe, from having himself, as we
have said, observed something fresh between the cardinal, the king, and
the queen.

As ten o’clock was striking, D’Artagnan left M. de Tréville, who
thanked him for his information, recommended him to have the service of
the king and queen always at heart, and returned to the saloon; but at
the foot of the stairs, D’Artagnan remembered he had forgotten his
cane. He consequently sprang up again, re-entered the office, with a
turn of his finger set the clock right again, that it might not be
perceived the next day that it had been put wrong, and certain from
that time that he had a witness to prove his alibi, he ran downstairs
and soon found himself in the street.

