Chapter XLI.
THE SIEGE OF LA ROCHELLE


The Siege of La Rochelle was one of the great political events of the
reign of Louis XIII., and one of the great military enterprises of the
cardinal. It is, then, interesting and even necessary that we should
say a few words about it, particularly as many details of this siege
are connected in too important a manner with the story we have
undertaken to relate to allow us to pass it over in silence.

The political plans of the cardinal when he undertook this siege were
extensive. Let us unfold them first, and then pass on to the private
plans which perhaps had not less influence upon his Eminence than the
others.

Of the important cities given up by Henry IV. to the Huguenots as places
of safety, there only remained La Rochelle. It became necessary,
therefore, to destroy this last bulwark of Calvinism—a dangerous leaven
with which the ferments of civil revolt and foreign war were constantly
mingling.

Spaniards, Englishmen, and Italian malcontents, adventurers of all
nations, and soldiers of fortune of every sect, flocked at the first
summons under the standard of the Protestants, and organized themselves
like a vast association, whose branches diverged freely over all parts
of Europe.

La Rochelle, which had derived a new importance from the ruin of the
other Calvinist cities, was, then, the focus of dissensions and
ambition. Moreover, its port was the last in the kingdom of France open
to the English, and by closing it against England, our eternal enemy,
the cardinal completed the work of Joan of Arc and the Duc de Guise.

Thus Bassompierre, who was at once Protestant and Catholic—Protestant
by conviction and Catholic as commander of the order of the Holy Ghost;
Bassompierre, who was a German by birth and a Frenchman at heart—in
short, Bassompierre, who had a distinguished command at the siege of La
Rochelle, said, in charging at the head of several other Protestant
nobles like himself, “You will see, gentlemen, that we shall be fools
enough to take La Rochelle.”

And Bassompierre was right. The cannonade of the Isle of Ré presaged to
him the dragonnades of the Cévennes; the taking of La Rochelle was the
preface to the revocation of the Edict of Nantes.

We have hinted that by the side of these views of the leveling and
simplifying minister, which belong to history, the chronicler is forced
to recognize the lesser motives of the amorous man and jealous rival.

Richelieu, as everyone knows, had loved the queen. Was this love a
simple political affair, or was it naturally one of those profound
passions which Anne of Austria inspired in those who approached her?
That we are not able to say; but at all events, we have seen, by the
anterior developments of this story, that Buckingham had the advantage
over him, and in two or three circumstances, particularly that of the
diamond studs, had, thanks to the devotedness of the three Musketeers
and the courage and conduct of D’Artagnan, cruelly mystified him.

It was, then, Richelieu’s object, not only to get rid of an enemy of
France, but to avenge himself on a rival; but this vengeance must be
grand and striking and worthy in every way of a man who held in his
hand, as his weapon for combat, the forces of a kingdom.

Richelieu knew that in combating England he combated Buckingham; that
in triumphing over England he triumphed over Buckingham—in short, that
in humiliating England in the eyes of Europe he humiliated Buckingham
in the eyes of the queen.

On his side Buckingham, in pretending to maintain the honor of England,
was moved by interests exactly like those of the cardinal. Buckingham
also was pursuing a private vengeance. Buckingham could not under any
pretense be admitted into France as an ambassador; he wished to enter
it as a conqueror.

It resulted from this that the real stake in this game, which two most
powerful kingdoms played for the good pleasure of two amorous men, was
simply a kind look from Anne of Austria.

The first advantage had been gained by Buckingham. Arriving
unexpectedly in sight of the Isle of Ré with ninety vessels and nearly
twenty thousand men, he had surprised the Comte de Toiras, who
commanded for the king in the Isle, and he had, after a bloody
conflict, effected his landing.

Allow us to observe in passing that in this fight perished the Baron de
Chantal; that the Baron de Chantal left a little orphan girl eighteen
months old, and that this little girl was afterward Mme. de Sévigné.

The Comte de Toiras retired into the citadel St. Martin with his
garrison, and threw a hundred men into a little fort called the fort of
La Prée.

This event had hastened the resolutions of the cardinal; and till the
king and he could take the command of the siege of La Rochelle, which
was determined, he had sent Monsieur to direct the first operations,
and had ordered all the troops he could dispose of to march toward the
theater of war. It was of this detachment, sent as a vanguard, that our
friend D’Artagnan formed a part.

The king, as we have said, was to follow as soon as his Bed of Justice
had been held; but on rising from his Bed of Justice on the
twenty-eighth of June, he felt himself attacked by fever. He was,
notwithstanding, anxious to set out; but his illness becoming more
serious, he was forced to stop at Villeroy.

Now, whenever the king halted, the Musketeers halted. It followed that
D’Artagnan, who was as yet purely and simply in the Guards, found
himself, for the time at least, separated from his good friends—Athos,
Porthos, and Aramis. This separation, which was no more than an
unpleasant circumstance, would have certainly become a cause of serious
uneasiness if he had been able to guess by what unknown dangers he was
surrounded.

He, however, arrived without accident in the camp established before La
Rochelle, on the tenth of the month of September of the year 1627.

Everything was in the same state. The Duke of Buckingham and his
English, masters of the Isle of Ré, continued to besiege, but without
success, the citadel St. Martin and the fort of La Prée; and
hostilities with La Rochelle had commenced, two or three days before,
about a fort which the Duc d’Angoulême had caused to be constructed
near the city.

The Guards, under the command of M. Dessessart, took up their quarters
at the Minimes; but, as we know, D’Artagnan, possessed with ambition to
enter the Musketeers, had formed but few friendships among his
comrades, and he felt himself isolated and given up to his own
reflections.

His reflections were not very cheerful. From the time of his arrival in
Paris, he had been mixed up with public affairs; but his own private
affairs had made no great progress, either in love or fortune. As to
love, the only woman he could have loved was Mme. Bonacieux; and Mme.
Bonacieux had disappeared, without his being able to discover what had
become of her. As to fortune, he had made—he, humble as he was—an enemy
of the cardinal; that is to say, of a man before whom trembled the
greatest men of the kingdom, beginning with the king.

That man had the power to crush him, and yet he had not done so. For a
mind so perspicuous as that of D’Artagnan, this indulgence was a light
by which he caught a glimpse of a better future.

Then he had made himself another enemy, less to be feared, he thought;
but nevertheless, he instinctively felt, not to be despised. This enemy
was Milady.

In exchange for all this, he had acquired the protection and good will
of the queen; but the favor of the queen was at the present time an
additional cause of persecution, and her protection, as it was known,
protected badly—as witness Chalais and Mme. Bonacieux.

What he had clearly gained in all this was the diamond, worth five or
six thousand livres, which he wore on his finger; and even this
diamond—supposing that D’Artagnan, in his projects of ambition, wished
to keep it, to make it someday a pledge for the gratitude of the
queen—had not in the meanwhile, since he could not part with it, more
value than the gravel he trod under his feet.

We say the gravel he trod under his feet, for D’Artagnan made these
reflections while walking solitarily along a pretty little road which
led from the camp to the village of Angoutin. Now, these reflections
had led him further than he intended, and the day was beginning to
decline when, by the last ray of the setting sun, he thought he saw the
barrel of a musket glitter from behind a hedge.

D’Artagnan had a quick eye and a prompt understanding. He comprehended
that the musket had not come there of itself, and that he who bore it
had not concealed himself behind a hedge with any friendly intentions.
He determined, therefore, to direct his course as clear from it as he
could when, on the opposite side of the road, from behind a rock, he
perceived the extremity of another musket.

This was evidently an ambuscade.

The young man cast a glance at the first musket and saw, with a certain
degree of inquietude, that it was leveled in his direction; but as soon
as he perceived that the orifice of the barrel was motionless, he threw
himself upon the ground. At the same instant the gun was fired, and he
heard the whistling of a ball pass over his head.

No time was to be lost. D’Artagnan sprang up with a bound, and at the
same instant the ball from the other musket tore up the gravel on the
very spot on the road where he had thrown himself with his face to the
ground.

D’Artagnan was not one of those foolhardy men who seek a ridiculous
death in order that it may be said of them that they did not retreat a
single step. Besides, courage was out of the question here; D’Artagnan
had fallen into an ambush.

“If there is a third shot,” said he to himself, “I am a lost man.”

He immediately, therefore, took to his heels and ran toward the camp,
with the swiftness of the young men of his country, so renowned for
their agility; but whatever might be his speed, the first who fired,
having had time to reload, fired a second shot, and this time so well
aimed that it struck his hat, and carried it ten paces from him.

As he, however, had no other hat, he picked up this as he ran, and
arrived at his quarters very pale and quite out of breath. He sat down
without saying a word to anybody, and began to reflect.

This event might have three causes:

The first and the most natural was that it might be an ambuscade of the
Rochellais, who might not be sorry to kill one of his Majesty’s Guards,
because it would be an enemy the less, and this enemy might have a
well-furnished purse in his pocket.

D’Artagnan took his hat, examined the hole made by the ball, and shook
his head. The ball was not a musket ball—it was an arquebus ball. The
accuracy of the aim had first given him the idea that a special weapon
had been employed. This could not, then, be a military ambuscade, as
the ball was not of the regular caliber.

This might be a kind remembrance of Monsieur the Cardinal. It may be
observed that at the very moment when, thanks to the ray of the sun, he
perceived the gun barrel, he was thinking with astonishment on the
forbearance of his Eminence with respect to him.

But D’Artagnan again shook his head. For people toward whom he had but
to put forth his hand, his Eminence had rarely recourse to such means.

It might be a vengeance of Milady; that was most probable.

He tried in vain to remember the faces or dress of the assassins; he
had escaped so rapidly that he had not had leisure to notice anything.

“Ah, my poor friends!” murmured D’Artagnan; “where are you? And that
you should fail me!”

D’Artagnan passed a very bad night. Three or four times he started up,
imagining that a man was approaching his bed for the purpose of
stabbing him. Nevertheless, day dawned without darkness having brought
any accident.

But D’Artagnan well suspected that that which was deferred was not
relinquished.

D’Artagnan remained all day in his quarters, assigning as a reason to
himself that the weather was bad.

At nine o’clock the next morning, the drums beat to arms. The Duc
d’Orléans visited the posts. The guards were under arms, and D’Artagnan
took his place in the midst of his comrades.

Monsieur passed along the front of the line; then all the superior
officers approached him to pay their compliments, M. Dessessart,
captain of the Guards, as well as the others.

At the expiration of a minute or two, it appeared to D’Artagnan that M.
Dessessart made him a sign to approach. He waited for a fresh gesture
on the part of his superior, for fear he might be mistaken; but this
gesture being repeated, he left the ranks, and advanced to receive
orders.

“Monsieur is about to ask for some men of good will for a dangerous
mission, but one which will do honor to those who shall accomplish it;
and I made you a sign in order that you might hold yourself in
readiness.”

“Thanks, my captain!” replied D’Artagnan, who wished for nothing better
than an opportunity to distinguish himself under the eye of the
lieutenant general.

In fact the Rochellais had made a _sortie_ during the night, and had
retaken a bastion of which the royal army had gained possession two
days before. The matter was to ascertain, by reconnoitering, how the
enemy guarded this bastion.

At the end of a few minutes Monsieur raised his voice, and said, “I
want for this mission three or four volunteers, led by a man who can be
depended upon.”

“As to the man to be depended upon, I have him under my hand,
monsieur,” said M. Dessessart, pointing to D’Artagnan; “and as to the
four or five volunteers, Monsieur has but to make his intentions known,
and the men will not be wanting.”

“Four men of good will who will risk being killed with me!” said
D’Artagnan, raising his sword.

Two of his comrades of the Guards immediately sprang forward, and two
other soldiers having joined them, the number was deemed sufficient.
D’Artagnan declined all others, being unwilling to take the first
chance from those who had the priority.

It was not known whether, after the taking of the bastion, the
Rochellais had evacuated it or left a garrison in it; the object then
was to examine the place near enough to verify the reports.

D’Artagnan set out with his four companions, and followed the trench;
the two Guards marched abreast with him, and the two soldiers followed
behind.

They arrived thus, screened by the lining of the trench, till they came
within a hundred paces of the bastion. There, on turning round,
D’Artagnan perceived that the two soldiers had disappeared.

He thought that, beginning to be afraid, they had stayed behind, and he
continued to advance.

At the turning of the counterscarp they found themselves within about
sixty paces of the bastion. They saw no one, and the bastion seemed
abandoned.

The three composing our forlorn hope were deliberating whether they
should proceed any further, when all at once a circle of smoke
enveloped the giant of stone, and a dozen balls came whistling around
D’Artagnan and his companions.

They knew all they wished to know; the bastion was guarded. A longer
stay in this dangerous spot would have been useless imprudence.
D’Artagnan and his two companions turned their backs, and commenced a
retreat which resembled a flight.

On arriving at the angle of the trench which was to serve them as a
rampart, one of the Guardsmen fell. A ball had passed through his
breast. The other, who was safe and sound, continued his way toward the
camp.

D’Artagnan was not willing to abandon his companion thus, and stooped
to raise him and assist him in regaining the lines; but at this moment
two shots were fired. One ball struck the head of the already-wounded
guard, and the other flattened itself against a rock, after having
passed within two inches of D’Artagnan.

The young man turned quickly round, for this attack could not have come
from the bastion, which was hidden by the angle of the trench. The idea
of the two soldiers who had abandoned him occurred to his mind, and
with them he remembered the assassins of two evenings before. He
resolved this time to know with whom he had to deal, and fell upon the
body of his comrade as if he were dead.

He quickly saw two heads appear above an abandoned work within thirty
paces of him; they were the heads of the two soldiers. D’Artagnan had
not been deceived; these two men had only followed for the purpose of
assassinating him, hoping that the young man’s death would be placed to
the account of the enemy.

As he might be only wounded and might denounce their crime, they came
up to him with the purpose of making sure. Fortunately, deceived by
D’Artagnan’s trick, they neglected to reload their guns.

When they were within ten paces of him, D’Artagnan, who in falling had
taken care not to let go his sword, sprang up close to them.

The assassins comprehended that if they fled toward the camp without
having killed their man, they should be accused by him; therefore their
first idea was to join the enemy. One of them took his gun by the
barrel, and used it as he would a club. He aimed a terrible blow at
D’Artagnan, who avoided it by springing to one side; but by this
movement he left a passage free to the bandit, who darted off toward
the bastion. As the Rochellais who guarded the bastion were ignorant of
the intentions of the man they saw coming toward them, they fired upon
him, and he fell, struck by a ball which broke his shoulder.

Meantime D’Artagnan had thrown himself upon the other soldier,
attacking him with his sword. The conflict was not long; the wretch had
nothing to defend himself with but his discharged arquebus. The sword
of the Guardsman slipped along the barrel of the now-useless weapon,
and passed through the thigh of the assassin, who fell.

D’Artagnan immediately placed the point of his sword at his throat.

“Oh, do not kill me!” cried the bandit. “Pardon, pardon, my officer,
and I will tell you all.”

“Is your secret of enough importance to me to spare your life for it?”
asked the young man, withholding his arm.

“Yes; if you think existence worth anything to a man of twenty, as you
are, and who may hope for everything, being handsome and brave, as you
are.”

“Wretch,” cried D’Artagnan, “speak quickly! Who employed you to
assassinate me?”

“A woman whom I don’t know, but who is called Milady.”

“But if you don’t know this woman, how do you know her name?”

“My comrade knows her, and called her so. It was with him she agreed,
and not with me; he even has in his pocket a letter from that person,
who attaches great importance to you, as I have heard him say.”

“But how did you become concerned in this villainous affair?”

“He proposed to me to undertake it with him, and I agreed.”

“And how much did she give you for this fine enterprise?”

“A hundred louis.”

“Well, come!” said the young man, laughing, “she thinks I am worth
something. A hundred louis? Well, that was a temptation for two
wretches like you. I understand why you accepted it, and I grant you my
pardon; but upon one condition.”

“What is that?” said the soldier, uneasy at perceiving that all was not
over.

“That you will go and fetch me the letter your comrade has in his
pocket.”

“But,” cried the bandit, “that is only another way of killing me. How
can I go and fetch that letter under the fire of the bastion?”

“You must nevertheless make up your mind to go and get it, or I swear
you shall die by my hand.”

“Pardon, monsieur; pity! In the name of that young lady you love, and
whom you perhaps believe dead but who is not!” cried the bandit,
throwing himself upon his knees and leaning upon his hand—for he began
to lose his strength with his blood.

“And how do you know there is a young woman whom I love, and that I
believed that woman dead?” asked D’Artagnan.

“By that letter which my comrade has in his pocket.”

“You see, then,” said D’Artagnan, “that I must have that letter. So no
more delay, no more hesitation; or else whatever may be my repugnance
to soiling my sword a second time with the blood of a wretch like you,
I swear by my faith as an honest man—” and at these words D’Artagnan
made so fierce a gesture that the wounded man sprang up.

“Stop, stop!” cried he, regaining strength by force of terror. “I will
go—I will go!”

D’Artagnan took the soldier’s arquebus, made him go on before him, and
urged him toward his companion by pricking him behind with his sword.

It was a frightful thing to see this wretch, leaving a long track of
blood on the ground he passed over, pale with approaching death, trying
to drag himself along without being seen to the body of his accomplice,
which lay twenty paces from him.

Terror was so strongly painted on his face, covered with a cold sweat,
that D’Artagnan took pity on him, and casting upon him a look of
contempt, “Stop,” said he, “I will show you the difference between a
man of courage and such a coward as you. Stay where you are; I will go
myself.”

And with a light step, an eye on the watch, observing the movements of
the enemy and taking advantage of the accidents of the ground,
D’Artagnan succeeded in reaching the second soldier.

There were two means of gaining his object—to search him on the spot,
or to carry him away, making a buckler of his body, and search him in
the trench.

D’Artagnan preferred the second means, and lifted the assassin onto his
shoulders at the moment the enemy fired.

A slight shock, the dull noise of three balls which penetrated the
flesh, a last cry, a convulsion of agony, proved to D’Artagnan that the
would-be assassin had saved his life.

D’Artagnan regained the trench, and threw the corpse beside the wounded
man, who was as pale as death.

Then he began to search. A leather pocketbook, a purse, in which was
evidently a part of the sum which the bandit had received, with a dice
box and dice, completed the possessions of the dead man.

He left the box and dice where they fell, threw the purse to the
wounded man, and eagerly opened the pocketbook.

Among some unimportant papers he found the following letter, that which
he had sought at the risk of his life:

“Since you have lost sight of that woman and she is now in safety in
the convent, which you should never have allowed her to reach, try, at
least, not to miss the man. If you do, you know that my hand stretches
far, and that you shall pay very dearly for the hundred louis you have
from me.”


No signature. Nevertheless it was plain the letter came from Milady. He
consequently kept it as a piece of evidence, and being in safety behind
the angle of the trench, he began to interrogate the wounded man. He
confessed that he had undertaken with his comrade—the same who was
killed—to carry off a young woman who was to leave Paris by the
Barrière de La Villette; but having stopped to drink at a cabaret, they
had missed the carriage by ten minutes.

“But what were you to do with that woman?” asked D’Artagnan, with
anguish.

“We were to have conveyed her to a hôtel in the Place Royale,” said the
wounded man.

“Yes, yes!” murmured D’Artagnan; “that’s the place—Milady’s own
residence!”

Then the young man tremblingly comprehended what a terrible thirst for
vengeance urged this woman on to destroy him, as well as all who loved
him, and how well she must be acquainted with the affairs of the court,
since she had discovered all. There could be no doubt she owed this
information to the cardinal.

But amid all this he perceived, with a feeling of real joy, that the
queen must have discovered the prison in which poor Mme. Bonacieux was
explaining her devotion, and that she had freed her from that prison;
and the letter he had received from the young woman, and her passage
along the road of Chaillot like an apparition, were now explained.

Then also, as Athos had predicted, it became possible to find Mme.
Bonacieux, and a convent was not impregnable.

This idea completely restored clemency to his heart. He turned toward
the wounded man, who had watched with intense anxiety all the various
expressions of his countenance, and holding out his arm to him, said,
“Come, I will not abandon you thus. Lean upon me, and let us return to
the camp.”

“Yes,” said the man, who could scarcely believe in such magnanimity,
“but is it not to have me hanged?”

“You have my word,” said he; “for the second time I give you your
life.”

The wounded man sank upon his knees, to again kiss the feet of his
preserver; but D’Artagnan, who had no longer a motive for staying so
near the enemy, abridged the testimonials of his gratitude.

The Guardsman who had returned at the first discharge announced the
death of his four companions. They were therefore much astonished and
delighted in the regiment when they saw the young man come back safe
and sound.

D’Artagnan explained the sword wound of his companion by a _sortie_
which he improvised. He described the death of the other soldier, and
the perils they had encountered. This recital was for him the occasion
of veritable triumph. The whole army talked of this expedition for a
day, and Monsieur paid him his compliments upon it. Besides this, as
every great action bears its recompense with it, the brave exploit of
D’Artagnan resulted in the restoration of the tranquility he had lost.
In fact, D’Artagnan believed that he might be tranquil, as one of his
two enemies was killed and the other devoted to his interests.

This tranquillity proved one thing—that D’Artagnan did not yet know
Milady.




Chapter XLII.
THE ANJOU WINE


After the most disheartening news of the king’s health, a report of his
convalescence began to prevail in the camp; and as he was very anxious
to be in person at the siege, it was said that as soon as he could
mount a horse he would set forward.

Meantime, Monsieur, who knew that from one day to the other he might
expect to be removed from his command by the Duc d’Angoulême, by
Bassompierre, or by Schomberg, who were all eager for his post, did but
little, lost his days in wavering, and did not dare to attempt any
great enterprise to drive the English from the Isle of Ré, where they
still besieged the citadel St. Martin and the fort of La Prée, as on
their side the French were besieging La Rochelle.

D’Artagnan, as we have said, had become more tranquil, as always
happens after a past danger, particularly when the danger seems to have
vanished. He only felt one uneasiness, and that was at not hearing any
tidings from his friends.

But one morning at the commencement of the month of November everything
was explained to him by this letter, dated from Villeroy:

M. D’ARTAGNAN, MM. Athos, Porthos, and Aramis, after having had an
entertainment at my house and enjoying themselves very much, created
such a disturbance that the provost of the castle, a rigid man, has
ordered them to be confined for some days; but I accomplish the order
they have given me by forwarding to you a dozen bottles of my Anjou
wine, with which they are much pleased. They are desirous that you
should drink to their health in their favorite wine. I have done this,
and am, monsieur, with great respect,


Your very humble and obedient servant,
GODEAU, _Purveyor of the Musketeers_


“That’s all well!” cried D’Artagnan. “They think of me in their
pleasures, as I thought of them in my troubles. Well, I will certainly
drink to their health with all my heart, but I will not drink alone.”

And D’Artagnan went among those Guardsmen with whom he had formed
greater intimacy than with the others, to invite them to enjoy with him
this present of delicious Anjou wine which had been sent him from
Villeroy.

One of the two Guardsmen was engaged that evening, and another the
next, so the meeting was fixed for the day after that.

D’Artagnan, on his return, sent the twelve bottles of wine to the
refreshment room of the Guards, with strict orders that great care
should be taken of it; and then, on the day appointed, as the dinner
was fixed for midday D’Artagnan sent Planchet at nine in the morning to
assist in preparing everything for the entertainment.

Planchet, very proud of being raised to the dignity of landlord,
thought he would make all ready, like an intelligent man; and with this
view called in the assistance of the lackey of one of his master’s
guests, named Fourreau, and the false soldier who had tried to kill
D’Artagnan and who, belonging to no corps, had entered into the service
of D’Artagnan, or rather of Planchet, after D’Artagnan had saved his
life.

The hour of the banquet being come, the two guards arrived, took their
places, and the dishes were arranged on the table. Planchet waited,
towel on arm; Fourreau uncorked the bottles; and Brisemont, which was
the name of the convalescent, poured the wine, which was a little
shaken by its journey, carefully into decanters. Of this wine, the
first bottle being a little thick at the bottom, Brisemont poured the
lees into a glass, and D’Artagnan desired him to drink it, for the poor
devil had not yet recovered his strength.

The guests having eaten the soup, were about to lift the first glass of
wine to their lips, when all at once the cannon sounded from Fort Louis
and Fort Neuf. The Guardsmen, imagining this to be caused by some
unexpected attack, either of the besieged or the English, sprang to
their swords. D’Artagnan, not less forward than they, did likewise, and
all ran out, in order to repair to their posts.

But scarcely were they out of the room before they were made aware of
the cause of this noise. Cries of “Live the king! Live the cardinal!”
resounded on every side, and the drums were beaten in all directions.

In short, the king, impatient, as has been said, had come by forced
marches, and had that moment arrived with all his household and a
reinforcement of ten thousand troops. His Musketeers proceeded and
followed him. D’Artagnan, placed in line with his company, saluted with
an expressive gesture his three friends, whose eyes soon discovered
him, and M. de Tréville, who detected him at once.

The ceremony of reception over, the four friends were soon in one
another’s arms.

“_Pardieu!_” cried D’Artagnan, “you could not have arrived in better
time; the dinner cannot have had time to get cold! Can it, gentlemen?”
added the young man, turning to the two Guards, whom he introduced to
his friends.

“Ah, ah!” said Porthos, “it appears we are feasting!”

“I hope,” said Aramis, “there are no women at your dinner.”

“Is there any drinkable wine in your tavern?” asked Athos.

“Well, _pardieu!_ there is yours, my dear friend,” replied D’Artagnan.

“Our wine!” said Athos, astonished.

“Yes, that you sent me.”

“We sent you wine?”

“You know very well—the wine from the hills of Anjou.”

“Yes, I know what brand you are talking about.”

“The wine you prefer.”

“Well, in the absence of champagne and chambertin, you must content
yourselves with that.”

“And so, connoisseurs in wine as we are, we have sent you some Anjou
wine?” said Porthos.

“Not exactly, it is the wine that was sent by your order.”

“On our account?” said the three Musketeers.

“Did you send this wine, Aramis?” said Athos.

“No; and you, Porthos?”

“No; and you, Athos?”

“No!”

“If it was not you, it was your purveyor,” said D’Artagnan.

“Our purveyor!”

“Yes, your purveyor, Godeau—the purveyor of the Musketeers.”

“My faith! never mind where it comes from,” said Porthos, “let us taste
it, and if it is good, let us drink it.”

“No,” said Athos; “don’t let us drink wine which comes from an unknown
source.”

“You are right, Athos,” said D’Artagnan. “Did none of you charge your
purveyor, Godeau, to send me some wine?”

“No! And yet you say he has sent you some as from us?”

“Here is his letter,” said D’Artagnan, and he presented the note to his
comrades.

“This is not his writing!” said Athos. “I am acquainted with it; before
we left Villeroy I settled the accounts of the regiment.”

“A false letter altogether,” said Porthos, “we have not been
disciplined.”

“D’Artagnan,” said Aramis, in a reproachful tone, “how could you
believe that we had made a disturbance?”

D’Artagnan grew pale, and a convulsive trembling shook all his limbs.

“Thou alarmest me!” said Athos, who never used _thee_ and _thou_ but
upon very particular occasions, “what has happened?”

“Look you, my friends!” cried D’Artagnan, “a horrible suspicion crosses
my mind! Can this be another vengeance of that woman?”

It was now Athos who turned pale.

D’Artagnan rushed toward the refreshment room, the three Musketeers and
the two Guards following him.

The first object that met the eyes of D’Artagnan on entering the room
was Brisemont, stretched upon the ground and rolling in horrible
convulsions.

Planchet and Fourreau, as pale as death, were trying to give him
succor; but it was plain that all assistance was useless—all the
features of the dying man were distorted with agony.

“Ah!” cried he, on perceiving D’Artagnan, “ah! this is frightful! You
pretend to pardon me, and you poison me!”

“I!” cried D’Artagnan. “I, wretch? What do you say?”

“I say that it was you who gave me the wine; I say that it was you who
desired me to drink it. I say you wished to avenge yourself on me, and
I say that it is horrible!”

“Do not think so, Brisemont,” said D’Artagnan; “do not think so. I
swear to you, I protest—”

“Oh, but God is above! God will punish you! My God, grant that he may
one day suffer what I suffer!”

“Upon the Gospel,” said D’Artagnan, throwing himself down by the dying
man, “I swear to you that the wine was poisoned and that I was going to
drink of it as you did.”

“I do not believe you,” cried the soldier, and he expired amid horrible
tortures.

“Frightful! frightful!” murmured Athos, while Porthos broke the bottles
and Aramis gave orders, a little too late, that a confessor should be
sent for.

“Oh, my friends,” said D’Artagnan, “you come once more to save my life,
not only mine but that of these gentlemen. Gentlemen,” continued he,
addressing the Guardsmen, “I request you will be silent with regard to
this adventure. Great personages may have had a hand in what you have
seen, and if talked about, the evil would only recoil upon us.”

“Ah, monsieur!” stammered Planchet, more dead than alive, “ah,
monsieur, what an escape I have had!”

“How, sirrah! you were going to drink my wine?”

“To the health of the king, monsieur; I was going to drink a small
glass of it if Fourreau had not told me I was called.”

“Alas!” said Fourreau, whose teeth chattered with terror, “I wanted to
get him out of the way that I might drink myself.”

“Gentlemen,” said D’Artagnan, addressing the Guardsmen, “you may easily
comprehend that such a feast can only be very dull after what has taken
place; so accept my excuses, and put off the party till another day, I
beg of you.”

The two Guardsmen courteously accepted D’Artagnan’s excuses, and
perceiving that the four friends desired to be alone, retired.

When the young Guardsman and the three Musketeers were without
witnesses, they looked at one another with an air which plainly
expressed that each of them perceived the gravity of their situation.

“In the first place,” said Athos, “let us leave this chamber; the dead
are not agreeable company, particularly when they have died a violent
death.”

“Planchet,” said D’Artagnan, “I commit the corpse of this poor devil to
your care. Let him be interred in holy ground. He committed a crime, it
is true; but he repented of it.”

And the four friends quit the room, leaving to Planchet and Fourreau
the duty of paying mortuary honors to Brisemont.

The host gave them another chamber, and served them with fresh eggs and
some water, which Athos went himself to draw at the fountain. In a few
words, Porthos and Aramis were posted as to the situation.

“Well,” said D’Artagnan to Athos, “you see, my dear friend, that this
is war to the death.”

Athos shook his head.

“Yes, yes,” replied he, “I perceive that plainly; but do you really
believe it is she?”

“I am sure of it.”

“Nevertheless, I confess I still doubt.”

“But the _fleur-de-lis_ on her shoulder?”

“She is some Englishwoman who has committed a crime in France, and has
been branded in consequence.”

“Athos, she is your wife, I tell you,” repeated D’Artagnan; “only
reflect how much the two descriptions resemble each other.”

“Yes; but I should think the other must be dead, I hanged her so
effectually.”

It was D’Artagnan who now shook his head in his turn.

“But in either case, what is to be done?” said the young man.

“The fact is, one cannot remain thus, with a sword hanging eternally
over his head,” said Athos. “We must extricate ourselves from this
position.”

“But how?”

“Listen! You must try to see her, and have an explanation with her. Say
to her: ‘Peace or war! My word as a gentleman never to say anything of
you, never to do anything against you; on your side, a solemn oath to
remain neutral with respect to me. If not, I will apply to the
chancellor, I will apply to the king, I will apply to the hangman, I
will move the courts against you, I will denounce you as branded, I
will bring you to trial; and if you are acquitted, well, by the faith
of a gentleman, I will kill you at the corner of some wall, as I would
a mad dog.’”

“I like the means well enough,” said D’Artagnan, “but where and how to
meet with her?”

“Time, dear friend, time brings round opportunity; opportunity is the
martingale of man. The more we have ventured the more we gain, when we
know how to wait.”

“Yes; but to wait surrounded by assassins and poisoners.”

“Bah!” said Athos. “God has preserved us hitherto, God will preserve us
still.”

“Yes, we. Besides, we are men; and everything considered, it is our lot
to risk our lives; but _she_,” asked he, in an undertone.

“What she?” asked Athos.

“Constance.”

“Madame Bonacieux! Ah, that’s true!” said Athos. “My poor friend, I had
forgotten you were in love.”

“Well, but,” said Aramis, “have you not learned by the letter you found
on the wretched corpse that she is in a convent? One may be very
comfortable in a convent; and as soon as the siege of La Rochelle is
terminated, I promise you on my part—”

“Good,” cried Athos, “good! Yes, my dear Aramis, we all know that your
views have a religious tendency.”

“I am only temporarily a Musketeer,” said Aramis, humbly.

“It is some time since we heard from his mistress,” said Athos, in a
low voice. “But take no notice; we know all about that.”

“Well,” said Porthos, “it appears to me that the means are very
simple.”

“What?” asked D’Artagnan.

“You say she is in a convent?” replied Porthos.

“Yes.”

“Very well. As soon as the siege is over, we’ll carry her off from that
convent.”

“But we must first learn what convent she is in.”

“That’s true,” said Porthos.

“But I think I have it,” said Athos. “Don’t you say, dear D’Artagnan,
that it is the queen who has made choice of the convent for her?”

“I believe so, at least.”

“In that case Porthos will assist us.”

“And how so, if you please?”

“Why, by your marchioness, your duchess, your princess. She must have a
long arm.”

“Hush!” said Porthos, placing a finger on his lips. “I believe her to
be a cardinalist; she must know nothing of the matter.”

“Then,” said Aramis, “I take upon myself to obtain intelligence of
her.”

“You, Aramis?” cried the three friends. “You! And how?”

“By the queen’s almoner, to whom I am very intimately allied,” said
Aramis, coloring.

And on this assurance, the four friends, who had finished their modest
repast, separated, with the promise of meeting again that evening.
D’Artagnan returned to less important affairs, and the three Musketeers
repaired to the king’s quarters, where they had to prepare their
lodging.




Chapter XLIII.
THE SIGN OF THE RED DOVECOT


Meanwhile the king, who, with more reason than the cardinal, showed his
hatred for Buckingham, although scarcely arrived was in such a haste to
meet the enemy that he commanded every disposition to be made to drive
the English from the Isle of Ré, and afterward to press the siege of La
Rochelle; but notwithstanding his earnest wish, he was delayed by the
dissensions which broke out between MM. Bassompierre and Schomberg,
against the Duc d’Angoulême.

MM. Bassompierre and Schomberg were marshals of France, and claimed
their right of commanding the army under the orders of the king; but
the cardinal, who feared that Bassompierre, a Huguenot at heart, might
press but feebly the English and Rochellais, his brothers in religion,
supported the Duc d’Angoulême, whom the king, at his instigation, had
named lieutenant general. The result was that to prevent MM.
Bassompierre and Schomberg from deserting the army, a separate command
had to be given to each. Bassompierre took up his quarters on the north
of the city, between Leu and Dompierre; the Duc d’Angoulême on the
east, from Dompierre to Perigny; and M. de Schomberg on the south, from
Perigny to Angoutin.

The quarters of Monsieur were at Dompierre; the quarters of the king
were sometimes at Estrée, sometimes at Jarrie; the cardinal’s quarters
were upon the downs, at the bridge of La Pierre, in a simple house
without any entrenchment. So that Monsieur watched Bassompierre; the
king, the Duc d’Angoulême; and the cardinal, M. de Schomberg.

As soon as this organization was established, they set about driving
the English from the Isle.

The juncture was favorable. The English, who require, above everything,
good living in order to be good soldiers, only eating salt meat and bad
biscuit, had many invalids in their camp. Still further, the sea, very
rough at this period of the year all along the sea coast, destroyed
every day some little vessel; and the shore, from the point of
l’Aiguillon to the trenches, was at every tide literally covered with
the wrecks of pinnacles, _roberges_, and feluccas. The result was that
even if the king’s troops remained quietly in their camp, it was
evident that some day or other, Buckingham, who only continued in the
Isle from obstinacy, would be obliged to raise the siege.

But as M. de Toiras gave information that everything was preparing in
the enemy’s camp for a fresh assault, the king judged that it would be
best to put an end to the affair, and gave the necessary orders for a
decisive action.

As it is not our intention to give a journal of the siege, but on the
contrary only to describe such of the events of it as are connected
with the story we are relating, we will content ourselves with saying
in two words that the expedition succeeded, to the great astonishment
of the king and the great glory of the cardinal. The English, repulsed
foot by foot, beaten in all encounters, and defeated in the passage of
the Isle of Loie, were obliged to re-embark, leaving on the field of
battle two thousand men, among whom were five colonels, three
lieutenant colonels, two hundred and fifty captains, twenty gentlemen
of rank, four pieces of cannon, and sixty flags, which were taken to
Paris by Claude de St. Simon, and suspended with great pomp in the
arches of Notre Dame.

Te Deums were chanted in camp, and afterward throughout France.

The cardinal was left free to carry on the siege, without having, at
least at the present, anything to fear on the part of the English.

But it must be acknowledged, this response was but momentary. An envoy
of the Duke of Buckingham, named Montague, was taken, and proof was
obtained of a league between the German Empire, Spain, England, and
Lorraine. This league was directed against France.

Still further, in Buckingham’s lodging, which he had been forced to
abandon more precipitately than he expected, papers were found which
confirmed this alliance and which, as the cardinal asserts in his
memoirs, strongly compromised Mme. de Chevreuse and consequently the
queen.

It was upon the cardinal that all the responsibility fell, for one is
not a despotic minister without responsibility. All, therefore, of the
vast resources of his genius were at work night and day, engaged in
listening to the least report heard in any of the great kingdoms of
Europe.

The cardinal was acquainted with the activity, and more particularly
the hatred, of Buckingham. If the league which threatened France
triumphed, all his influence would be lost. Spanish policy and Austrian
policy would have their representatives in the cabinet of the Louvre,
where they had as yet but partisans; and he, Richelieu—the French
minister, the national minister—would be ruined. The king, even while
obeying him like a child, hated him as a child hates his master, and
would abandon him to the personal vengeance of Monsieur and the queen.
He would then be lost, and France, perhaps, with him. All this must be
prepared against.

Courtiers, becoming every instant more numerous, succeeded one another,
day and night, in the little house of the bridge of La Pierre, in which
the cardinal had established his residence.

There were monks who wore the frock with such an ill grace that it was
easy to perceive they belonged to the church militant; women a little
inconvenienced by their costume as pages and whose large trousers could
not entirely conceal their rounded forms; and peasants with blackened
hands but with fine limbs, savoring of the man of quality a league off.

There were also less agreeable visits—for two or three times reports
were spread that the cardinal had nearly been assassinated.

It is true that the enemies of the cardinal said that it was he himself
who set these bungling assassins to work, in order to have, if wanted,
the right of using reprisals; but we must not believe everything
ministers say, nor everything their enemies say.

These attempts did not prevent the cardinal, to whom his most
inveterate detractors have never denied personal bravery, from making
nocturnal excursions, sometimes to communicate to the Duc d’Angoulême
important orders, sometimes to confer with the king, and sometimes to
have an interview with a messenger whom he did not wish to see at home.

On their part the Musketeers, who had not much to do with the siege,
were not under very strict orders and led a joyous life. This was the
more easy for our three companions in particular; for being friends of
M. de Tréville, they obtained from him special permission to be absent
after the closing of the camp.

Now, one evening when D’Artagnan, who was in the trenches, was not able
to accompany them, Athos, Porthos, and Aramis, mounted on their battle
steeds, enveloped in their war cloaks, with their hands upon their
pistol butts, were returning from a drinking place called the Red
Dovecot, which Athos had discovered two days before upon the route to
Jarrie, following the road which led to the camp and quite on their
guard, as we have stated, for fear of an ambuscade, when, about a
quarter of a league from the village of Boisnau, they fancied they
heard the sound of horses approaching them. They immediately all three
halted, closed in, and waited, occupying the middle of the road. In an
instant, and as the moon broke from behind a cloud, they saw at a
turning of the road two horsemen who, on perceiving them, stopped in
their turn, appearing to deliberate whether they should continue their
route or go back. The hesitation created some suspicion in the three
friends, and Athos, advancing a few paces in front of the others, cried
in a firm voice, “Who goes there?”

“Who goes there, yourselves?” replied one of the horsemen.

“That is not an answer,” replied Athos. “Who goes there? Answer, or we
charge.”

“Beware of what you are about, gentlemen!” said a clear voice which
seemed accustomed to command.

“It is some superior officer making his night rounds,” said Athos.
“What do you wish, gentlemen?”

“Who are you?” said the same voice, in the same commanding tone.
“Answer in your turn, or you may repent of your disobedience.”

“King’s Musketeers,” said Athos, more and more convinced that he who
interrogated them had the right to do so.

“What company?”

“Company of Tréville.”

“Advance, and give an account of what you are doing here at this hour.”

The three companions advanced rather humbly—for all were now convinced
that they had to do with someone more powerful than themselves—leaving
Athos the post of speaker.

One of the two riders, he who had spoken second, was ten paces in front
of his companion. Athos made a sign to Porthos and Aramis also to
remain in the rear, and advanced alone.

“Your pardon, my officer,” said Athos; “but we were ignorant with whom
we had to do, and you may see that we were keeping good guard.”

“Your name?” said the officer, who covered a part of his face with his
cloak.

“But yourself, monsieur,” said Athos, who began to be annoyed by this
inquisition, “give me, I beg you, the proof that you have the right to
question me.”

“Your name?” repeated the cavalier a second time, letting his cloak
fall, and leaving his face uncovered.

“Monsieur the Cardinal!” cried the stupefied Musketeer.

“Your name?” cried his Eminence, for the third time.

“Athos,” said the Musketeer.

The cardinal made a sign to his attendant, who drew near. “These three
Musketeers shall follow us,” said he, in an undertone. “I am not
willing it should be known I have left the camp; and if they follow us
we shall be certain they will tell nobody.”

“We are gentlemen, monseigneur,” said Athos; “require our parole, and
give yourself no uneasiness. Thank God, we can keep a secret.”

The cardinal fixed his piercing eyes on this courageous speaker.

“You have a quick ear, Monsieur Athos,” said the cardinal; “but now
listen to this. It is not from mistrust that I request you to follow
me, but for my security. Your companions are no doubt Messieurs Porthos
and Aramis.”

“Yes, your Eminence,” said Athos, while the two Musketeers who had
remained behind advanced hat in hand.

“I know you, gentlemen,” said the cardinal, “I know you. I know you are
not quite my friends, and I am sorry you are not so; but I know you are
brave and loyal gentlemen, and that confidence may be placed in you.
Monsieur Athos, do me, then, the honor to accompany me; you and your
two friends, and then I shall have an escort to excite envy in his
Majesty, if we should meet him.”

The three Musketeers bowed to the necks of their horses.

“Well, upon my honor,” said Athos, “your Eminence is right in taking us
with you; we have seen several ill-looking faces on the road, and we
have even had a quarrel at the Red Dovecot with four of those faces.”

“A quarrel, and what for, gentlemen?” said the cardinal; “you know I
don’t like quarrelers.”

“And that is the reason why I have the honor to inform your Eminence of
what has happened; for you might learn it from others, and upon a false
account believe us to be in fault.”

“What have been the results of your quarrel?” said the cardinal,
knitting his brow.

“My friend, Aramis, here, has received a slight sword wound in the arm,
but not enough to prevent him, as your Eminence may see, from mounting
to the assault tomorrow, if your Eminence orders an escalade.”

“But you are not the men to allow sword wounds to be inflicted upon you
thus,” said the cardinal. “Come, be frank, gentlemen, you have settled
accounts with somebody! Confess; you know I have the right of giving
absolution.”

“I, monseigneur?” said Athos. “I did not even draw my sword, but I took
him who offended me round the body, and threw him out of the window. It
appears that in falling,” continued Athos, with some hesitation, “he
broke his thigh.”

“Ah, ah!” said the cardinal; “and you, Monsieur Porthos?”

“I, monseigneur, knowing that dueling is prohibited—I seized a bench,
and gave one of those brigands such a blow that I believe his shoulder
is broken.”

“Very well,” said the cardinal; “and you, Monsieur Aramis?”

“Monseigneur, being of a very mild disposition, and being, likewise, of
which Monseigneur perhaps is not aware, about to enter into orders, I
endeavored to appease my comrades, when one of these wretches gave me a
wound with a sword, treacherously, across my left arm. Then I admit my
patience failed me; I drew my sword in my turn, and as he came back to
the charge, I fancied I felt that in throwing himself upon me, he let
it pass through his body. I only know for a certainty that he fell; and
it seemed to me that he was borne away with his two companions.”

“The devil, gentlemen!” said the cardinal, “three men placed _hors de
combat_ in a cabaret squabble! You don’t do your work by halves. And
pray what was this quarrel about?”

“These fellows were drunk,” said Athos, “and knowing there was a lady
who had arrived at the cabaret this evening, they wanted to force her
door.”

“Force her door!” said the cardinal, “and for what purpose?”

“To do her violence, without doubt,” said Athos. “I have had the honor
of informing your Eminence that these men were drunk.”

“And was this lady young and handsome?” asked the cardinal, with a
certain degree of anxiety.

“We did not see her, monseigneur,” said Athos.

“You did not see her? Ah, very well,” replied the cardinal, quickly.
“You did well to defend the honor of a woman; and as I am going to the
Red Dovecot myself, I shall know if you have told me the truth.”

“Monseigneur,” said Athos, haughtily, “we are gentlemen, and to save
our heads we would not be guilty of a falsehood.”

“Therefore I do not doubt what you say, Monsieur Athos, I do not doubt
it for a single instant; but,” added he, “to change the conversation,
was this lady alone?”

“The lady had a cavalier shut up with her,” said Athos, “but as
notwithstanding the noise, this cavalier did not show himself, it is to
be presumed that he is a coward.”

“‘Judge not rashly’, says the Gospel,” replied the cardinal.

Athos bowed.

“And now, gentlemen, that’s well,” continued the cardinal. “I know what
I wish to know; follow me.”

The three Musketeers passed behind his Eminence, who again enveloped
his face in his cloak, and put his horse in motion, keeping from eight
to ten paces in advance of his four companions.

They soon arrived at the silent, solitary inn. No doubt the host knew
what illustrious visitor was expected, and had consequently sent
intruders out of the way.

Ten paces from the door the cardinal made a sign to his esquire and the
three Musketeers to halt. A saddled horse was fastened to the window
shutter. The cardinal knocked three times, and in a peculiar manner.

A man, enveloped in a cloak, came out immediately, and exchanged some
rapid words with the cardinal; after which he mounted his horse, and
set off in the direction of Surgères, which was likewise the way to
Paris.

“Advance, gentlemen,” said the cardinal.

“You have told me the truth, my gentlemen,” said he, addressing the
Musketeers, “and it will not be my fault if our encounter this evening
be not advantageous to you. In the meantime, follow me.”

The cardinal alighted; the three Musketeers did likewise. The cardinal
threw the bridle of his horse to his esquire; the three Musketeers
fastened the horses to the shutters.

The host stood at the door. For him, the cardinal was only an officer
coming to visit a lady.

“Have you any chamber on the ground floor where these gentlemen can
wait near a good fire?” said the cardinal.

The host opened the door of a large room, in which an old stove had
just been replaced by a large and excellent chimney.

“I have this,” said he.

“That will do,” replied the cardinal. “Enter, gentlemen, and be kind
enough to wait for me; I shall not be more than half an hour.”

And while the three Musketeers entered the ground floor room, the
cardinal, without asking further information, ascended the staircase
like a man who has no need of having his road pointed out to him.




Chapter XLIV.
THE UTILITY OF STOVEPIPES


It was evident that without suspecting it, and actuated solely by their
chivalrous and adventurous character, our three friends had just
rendered a service to someone the cardinal honored with his special
protection.

Now, who was that someone? That was the question the three Musketeers
put to one another. Then, seeing that none of their replies could throw
any light on the subject, Porthos called the host and asked for dice.

Porthos and Aramis placed themselves at the table and began to play.
Athos walked about in a contemplative mood.

While thinking and walking, Athos passed and repassed before the pipe
of the stove, broken in halves, the other extremity passing into the
chamber above; and every time he passed and repassed he heard a murmur
of words, which at length fixed his attention. Athos went close to it,
and distinguished some words that appeared to merit so great an
interest that he made a sign to his friends to be silent, remaining
himself bent with his ear directed to the opening of the lower orifice.

“Listen, Milady,” said the cardinal, “the affair is important. Sit
down, and let us talk it over.”

“Milady!” murmured Athos.

“I listen to your Eminence with greatest attention,” replied a female
voice which made the Musketeer start.

“A small vessel with an English crew, whose captain is on my side,
awaits you at the mouth of Charente, at Fort La Pointe*. He will set
sail tomorrow morning.”

* Fort La Pointe, or Fort Vasou, was not built until 1672, nearly 50
years later.


“I must go thither tonight?”

“Instantly! That is to say, when you have received my instructions. Two
men, whom you will find at the door on going out, will serve you as
escort. You will allow me to leave first; then, after half an hour, you
can go away in your turn.”

“Yes, monseigneur. Now let us return to the mission with which you wish
to charge me; and as I desire to continue to merit the confidence of
your Eminence, deign to unfold it to me in terms clear and precise,
that I may not commit an error.”

There was an instant of profound silence between the two interlocutors.
It was evident that the cardinal was weighing beforehand the terms in
which he was about to speak, and that Milady was collecting all her
intellectual faculties to comprehend the things he was about to say,
and to engrave them in her memory when they should be spoken.

Athos took advantage of this moment to tell his two companions to
fasten the door inside, and to make them a sign to come and listen with
him.

The two Musketeers, who loved their ease, brought a chair for each of
themselves and one for Athos. All three then sat down with their heads
together and their ears on the alert.

“You will go to London,” continued the cardinal. “Arrived in London,
you will seek Buckingham.”

“I must beg your Eminence to observe,” said Milady, “that since the
affair of the diamond studs, about which the duke always suspected me,
his Grace distrusts me.”

“Well, this time,” said the cardinal, “it is not necessary to steal his
confidence, but to present yourself frankly and loyally as a
negotiator.”

“Frankly and loyally,” repeated Milady, with an unspeakable expression
of duplicity.

“Yes, frankly and loyally,” replied the cardinal, in the same tone.
“All this negotiation must be carried on openly.”

“I will follow your Eminence’s instructions to the letter. I only wait
till you give them.”

“You will go to Buckingham in my behalf, and you will tell him I am
acquainted with all the preparations he has made; but that they give me
no uneasiness, since at the first step he takes I will ruin the queen.”

“Will he believe that your Eminence is in a position to accomplish the
threat thus made?”

“Yes; for I have the proofs.”

“I must be able to present these proofs for his appreciation.”

“Without doubt. And you will tell him I will publish the report of
Bois-Robert and the Marquis de Beautru, upon the interview which the
duke had at the residence of Madame the Constable with the queen on the
evening Madame the Constable gave a masquerade. You will tell him, in
order that he may not doubt, that he came there in the costume of the
Great Mogul, which the Chevalier de Guise was to have worn, and that he
purchased this exchange for the sum of three thousand pistoles.”

“Well, monseigneur?”

“All the details of his coming into and going out of the palace—on the
night when he introduced himself in the character of an Italian fortune
teller—you will tell him, that he may not doubt the correctness of my
information; that he had under his cloak a large white robe dotted with
black tears, death’s heads, and crossbones—for in case of a surprise,
he was to pass for the phantom of the White Lady who, as all the world
knows, appears at the Louvre every time any great event is impending.”

“Is that all, monseigneur?”

“Tell him also that I am acquainted with all the details of the
adventure at Amiens; that I will have a little romance made of it,
wittily turned, with a plan of the garden and portraits of the
principal actors in that nocturnal romance.”

“I will tell him that.”

“Tell him further that I hold Montague in my power; that Montague is in
the Bastille; that no letters were found upon him, it is true, but that
torture may make him tell much of what he knows, and even what he does
not know.”

“Exactly.”

“Then add that his Grace has, in the precipitation with which he quit
the Isle of Ré, forgotten and left behind him in his lodging a certain
letter from Madame de Chevreuse which singularly compromises the queen,
inasmuch as it proves not only that her Majesty can love the enemies of
the king but that she can conspire with the enemies of France. You
recollect perfectly all I have told you, do you not?”

“Your Eminence will judge: the ball of Madame the Constable; the night
at the Louvre; the evening at Amiens; the arrest of Montague; the
letter of Madame de Chevreuse.”

“That’s it,” said the cardinal, “that’s it. You have an excellent
memory, Milady.”

“But,” resumed she to whom the cardinal addressed this flattering
compliment, “if, in spite of all these reasons, the duke does not give
way and continues to menace France?”

“The duke is in love to madness, or rather to folly,” replied
Richelieu, with great bitterness. “Like the ancient paladins, he has
only undertaken this war to obtain a look from his lady love. If he
becomes certain that this war will cost the honor, and perhaps the
liberty, of the lady of his thoughts, as he says, I will answer for it
he will look twice.”

“And yet,” said Milady, with a persistence that proved she wished to
see clearly to the end of the mission with which she was about to be
charged, “if he persists?”

“If he persists?” said the cardinal. “That is not probable.”

“It is possible,” said Milady.

“If he persists—” His Eminence made a pause, and resumed: “If he
persists—well, then I shall hope for one of those events which change
the destinies of states.”

“If your Eminence would quote to me some one of these events in
history,” said Milady, “perhaps I should partake of your confidence as
to the future.”

“Well, here, for example,” said Richelieu: “when, in 1610, for a cause
similar to that which moves the duke, King Henry IV., of glorious
memory, was about, at the same time, to invade Flanders and Italy, in
order to attack Austria on both sides. Well, did there not happen an
event which saved Austria? Why should not the king of France have the
same chance as the emperor?”

“Your Eminence means, I presume, the knife stab in the Rue de la
Feronnerie?”

“Precisely,” said the cardinal.

“Does not your Eminence fear that the punishment inflicted upon
Ravaillac may deter anyone who might entertain the idea of imitating
him?”

“There will be, in all times and in all countries, particularly if
religious divisions exist in those countries, fanatics who ask nothing
better than to become martyrs. Ay, and observe—it just occurs to me
that the Puritans are furious against Buckingham, and their preachers
designate him as the Antichrist.”

“Well?” said Milady.

“Well,” continued the cardinal, in an indifferent tone, “the only thing
to be sought for at this moment is some woman, handsome, young, and
clever, who has cause of quarrel with the duke. The duke has had many
affairs of gallantry; and if he has fostered his amours by promises of
eternal constancy, he must likewise have sown the seeds of hatred by
his eternal infidelities.”

“No doubt,” said Milady, coolly, “such a woman may be found.”

“Well, such a woman, who would place the knife of Jacques Clément or of
Ravaillac in the hands of a fanatic, would save France.”

“Yes; but she would then be the accomplice of an assassination.”

“Were the accomplices of Ravaillac or of Jacques Clément ever known?”

“No; for perhaps they were too high-placed for anyone to dare look for
them where they were. The Palace of Justice would not be burned down
for everybody, monseigneur.”

“You think, then, that the fire at the Palace of Justice was not caused
by chance?” asked Richelieu, in the tone with which he would have put a
question of no importance.

“I, monseigneur?” replied Milady. “I think nothing; I quote a fact,
that is all. Only I say that if I were named Madame de Montpensier, or
the Queen Marie de Médicis, I should use less precautions than I take,
being simply called Milady Clarik.”

“That is just,” said Richelieu. “What do you require, then?”

“I require an order which would ratify beforehand all that I should
think proper to do for the greatest good of France.”

“But in the first place, this woman I have described must be found who
is desirous of avenging herself upon the duke.”

“She is found,” said Milady.

“Then the miserable fanatic must be found who will serve as an
instrument of God’s justice.”

“He will be found.”

“Well,” said the cardinal, “then it will be time to claim the order
which you just now required.”

“Your Eminence is right,” replied Milady; “and I have been wrong in
seeing in the mission with which you honor me anything but that which
it really is—that is, to announce to his Grace, on the part of your
Eminence, that you are acquainted with the different disguises by means
of which he succeeded in approaching the queen during the fête given by
Madame the Constable; that you have proofs of the interview granted at
the Louvre by the queen to a certain Italian astrologer who was no
other than the Duke of Buckingham; that you have ordered a little
romance of a satirical nature to be written upon the adventures of
Amiens, with a plan of the gardens in which those adventures took
place, and portraits of the actors who figured in them; that Montague
is in the Bastille, and that the torture may make him say things he
remembers, and even things he has forgotten; that you possess a certain
letter from Madame de Chevreuse, found in his Grace’s lodging, which
singularly compromises not only her who wrote it, but her in whose name
it was written. Then, if he persists, notwithstanding all this—as that
is, as I have said, the limit of my mission—I shall have nothing to do
but to pray God to work a miracle for the salvation of France. That is
it, is it not, monseigneur, and I shall have nothing else to do?”

“That is it,” replied the cardinal, dryly.

“And now,” said Milady, without appearing to remark the change of the
duke’s tone toward her—“now that I have received the instructions of
your Eminence as concerns your enemies, Monseigneur will permit me to
say a few words to him of mine?”

“Have you enemies, then?” asked Richelieu.

“Yes, monseigneur, enemies against whom you owe me all your support,
for I made them by serving your Eminence.”

“Who are they?” replied the duke.

“In the first place, there is a little _intrigante_ named Bonacieux.”

“She is in the prison of Nantes.”

“That is to say, she was there,” replied Milady; “but the queen has
obtained an order from the king by means of which she has been conveyed
to a convent.”

“To a convent?” said the duke.

“Yes, to a convent.”

“And to which?”

“I don’t know; the secret has been well kept.”

“But _I_ will know!”

“And your Eminence will tell me in what convent that woman is?”

“I can see nothing inconvenient in that,” said the cardinal.

“Well, now I have an enemy much more to be dreaded by me than this
little Madame Bonacieux.”

“Who is that?”

“Her lover.”

“What is his name?”

“Oh, your Eminence knows him well,” cried Milady, carried away by her
anger. “He is the evil genius of both of us. It is he who in an
encounter with your Eminence’s Guards decided the victory in favor of
the king’s Musketeers; it is he who gave three desperate wounds to De
Wardes, your emissary, and who caused the affair of the diamond studs
to fail; it is he who, knowing it was I who had Madame Bonacieux
carried off, has sworn my death.”

“Ah, ah!” said the cardinal, “I know of whom you speak.”

“I mean that miserable D’Artagnan.”

“He is a bold fellow,” said the cardinal.

“And it is exactly because he is a bold fellow that he is the more to
be feared.”

“I must have,” said the duke, “a proof of his connection with
Buckingham.”

“A proof?” cried Milady; “I will have ten.”

“Well, then, it becomes the simplest thing in the world; get me that
proof, and I will send him to the Bastille.”

“So far good, monseigneur; but afterwards?”

“When once in the Bastille, there is no afterward!” said the cardinal,
in a low voice. “Ah, _pardieu!_” continued he, “if it were as easy for
me to get rid of my enemy as it is easy to get rid of yours, and if it
were against such people you require impunity—”

“Monseigneur,” replied Milady, “a fair exchange. Life for life, man for
man; give me one, I will give you the other.”

“I don’t know what you mean, nor do I even desire to know what you
mean,” replied the cardinal; “but I wish to please you, and see nothing
out of the way in giving you what you demand with respect to so
infamous a creature—the more so as you tell me this D’Artagnan is a
libertine, a duelist, and a traitor.”

“An infamous scoundrel, monseigneur, a scoundrel!”

“Give me paper, a quill, and some ink, then,” said the cardinal.

“Here they are, monseigneur.”

There was a moment of silence, which proved that the cardinal was
employed in seeking the terms in which he should write the note, or
else in writing it. Athos, who had not lost a word of the conversation,
took his two companions by the hand, and led them to the other end of
the room.

“Well,” said Porthos, “what do you want, and why do you not let us
listen to the end of the conversation?”

“Hush!” said Athos, speaking in a low voice. “We have heard all it was
necessary we should hear; besides, I don’t prevent you from listening,
but I must be gone.”

“You must be gone!” said Porthos; “and if the cardinal asks for you,
what answer can we make?”

“You will not wait till he asks; you will speak first, and tell him
that I am gone on the lookout, because certain expressions of our host
have given me reason to think the road is not safe. I will say two
words about it to the cardinal’s esquire likewise. The rest concerns
myself; don’t be uneasy about that.”

“Be prudent, Athos,” said Aramis.

“Be easy on that head,” replied Athos; “you know I am cool enough.”

Porthos and Aramis resumed their places by the stovepipe.

As to Athos, he went out without any mystery, took his horse, which was
tied with those of his friends to the fastenings of the shutters, in
four words convinced the attendant of the necessity of a vanguard for
their return, carefully examined the priming of his pistols, drew his
sword, and took, like a forlorn hope, the road to the camp.




Chapter XLV.
A CONJUGAL SCENE


As Athos had foreseen, it was not long before the cardinal came down.
He opened the door of the room in which the Musketeers were, and found
Porthos playing an earnest game of dice with Aramis. He cast a rapid
glance around the room, and perceived that one of his men was missing.

“What has become of Monseigneur Athos?” asked he.

“Monseigneur,” replied Porthos, “he has gone as a scout, on account of
some words of our host, which made him believe the road was not safe.”

“And you, what have you done, Monsieur Porthos?”

“I have won five pistoles of Aramis.”

“Well; now will you return with me?”

“We are at your Eminence’s orders.”

“To horse, then, gentlemen; for it is getting late.”

The attendant was at the door, holding the cardinal’s horse by the
bridle. At a short distance a group of two men and three horses
appeared in the shade. These were the two men who were to conduct
Milady to Fort La Pointe, and superintend her embarkation.

The attendant confirmed to the cardinal what the two Musketeers had
already said with respect to Athos. The cardinal made an approving
gesture, and retraced his route with the same precautions he had used
in coming.

Let us leave him to follow the road to the camp protected by his
esquire and the two Musketeers, and return to Athos.

For a hundred paces he maintained the speed at which he started; but
when out of sight he turned his horse to the right, made a circuit, and
came back within twenty paces of a high hedge to watch the passage of
the little troop. Having recognized the laced hats of his companions
and the golden fringe of the cardinal’s cloak, he waited till the
horsemen had turned the angle of the road, and having lost sight of
them, he returned at a gallop to the inn, which was opened to him
without hesitation.

The host recognized him.

“My officer,” said Athos, “has forgotten to give a piece of very
important information to the lady, and has sent me back to repair his
forgetfulness.”

“Go up,” said the host; “she is still in her chamber.”

Athos availed himself of the permission, ascended the stairs with his
lightest step, gained the landing, and through the open door perceived
Milady putting on her hat.

He entered the chamber and closed the door behind him. At the noise he
made in pushing the bolt, Milady turned round.

Athos was standing before the door, enveloped in his cloak, with his
hat pulled down over his eyes. On seeing this figure, mute and
immovable as a statue, Milady was frightened.

“Who are you, and what do you want?” cried she.

“Humph,” murmured Athos, “it is certainly she!”

And letting fall his cloak and raising his hat, he advanced toward
Milady.

“Do you know me, madame?” said he.

Milady made one step forward, and then drew back as if she had seen a
serpent.

“So far, well,” said Athos, “I perceive you know me.”

“The Comte de la Fère!” murmured Milady, becoming exceedingly pale, and
drawing back till the wall prevented her from going any farther.

“Yes, Milady,” replied Athos; “the Comte de la Fère in person, who
comes expressly from the other world to have the pleasure of paying you
a visit. Sit down, madame, and let us talk, as the cardinal said.”

Milady, under the influence of inexpressible terror, sat down without
uttering a word.

“You certainly are a demon sent upon the earth!” said Athos. “Your
power is great, I know; but you also know that with the help of God men
have often conquered the most terrible demons. You have once before
thrown yourself in my path. I thought I had crushed you, madame; but
either I was deceived or hell has resuscitated you!”

Milady at these words, which recalled frightful remembrances, hung down
her head with a suppressed groan.

“Yes, hell has resuscitated you,” continued Athos. “Hell has made you
rich, hell has given you another name, hell has almost made you another
face; but it has neither effaced the stains from your soul nor the
brand from your body.”

Milady arose as if moved by a powerful spring, and her eyes flashed
lightning. Athos remained sitting.

“You believed me to be dead, did you not, as I believed you to be? And
the name of Athos as well concealed the Comte de la Fère, as the name
Milady Clarik concealed Anne de Breuil. Was it not so you were called
when your honored brother married us? Our position is truly a strange
one,” continued Athos, laughing. “We have only lived up to the present
time because we believed each other dead, and because a remembrance is
less oppressive than a living creature, though a remembrance is
sometimes devouring.”

“But,” said Milady, in a hollow, faint voice, “what brings you back to
me, and what do you want with me?”

“I wish to tell you that though remaining invisible to your eyes, I
have not lost sight of you.”

“You know what I have done?”

“I can relate to you, day by day, your actions from your entrance to
the service of the cardinal to this evening.”

A smile of incredulity passed over the pale lips of Milady.

“Listen! It was you who cut off the two diamond studs from the shoulder
of the Duke of Buckingham; it was you who had Madame Bonacieux carried
off; it was you who, in love with De Wardes and thinking to pass the
night with him, opened the door to Monsieur d’Artagnan; it was you who,
believing that De Wardes had deceived you, wished to have him killed by
his rival; it was you who, when this rival had discovered your infamous
secret, wished to have him killed in his turn by two assassins, whom
you sent in pursuit of him; it was you who, finding the balls had
missed their mark, sent poisoned wine with a forged letter, to make
your victim believe that the wine came from his friends. In short, it
was you who have but now in this chamber, seated in this chair I now
fill, made an engagement with Cardinal Richelieu to cause the Duke of
Buckingham to be assassinated, in exchange for the promise he has made
you to allow you to assassinate D’Artagnan.”

Milady was livid.

“You must be Satan!” cried she.

“Perhaps,” said Athos; “But at all events listen well to this.
Assassinate the Duke of Buckingham, or cause him to be assassinated—I
care very little about that! I don’t know him. Besides, he is an
Englishman. But do not touch with the tip of your finger a single hair
of D’Artagnan, who is a faithful friend whom I love and defend, or I
swear to you by the head of my father the crime which you shall have
endeavored to commit, or shall have committed, shall be the last.”

“Monsieur d’Artagnan has cruelly insulted me,” said Milady, in a hollow
tone; “Monsieur d’Artagnan shall die!”

“Indeed! Is it possible to insult you, madame?” said Athos, laughing;
“he has insulted you, and he shall die!”

“He shall die!” replied Milady; “she first, and he afterward.”

Athos was seized with a kind of vertigo. The sight of this creature,
who had nothing of the woman about her, recalled awful remembrances. He
thought how one day, in a less dangerous situation than the one in
which he was now placed, he had already endeavored to sacrifice her to
his honor. His desire for blood returned, burning his brain and
pervading his frame like a raging fever; he arose in his turn, reached
his hand to his belt, drew forth a pistol, and cocked it.

Milady, pale as a corpse, endeavored to cry out; but her swollen tongue
could utter no more than a hoarse sound which had nothing human in it
and resembled the rattle of a wild beast. Motionless against the dark
tapestry, with her hair in disorder, she appeared like a horrid image
of terror.

Athos slowly raised his pistol, stretched out his arm so that the
weapon almost touched Milady’s forehead, and then, in a voice the more
terrible from having the supreme calmness of a fixed resolution,
“Madame,” said he, “you will this instant deliver to me the paper the
cardinal signed; or upon my soul, I will blow your brains out.”

With another man, Milady might have preserved some doubt; but she knew
Athos. Nevertheless, she remained motionless.

“You have one second to decide,” said he.

Milady saw by the contraction of his countenance that the trigger was
about to be pulled; she reached her hand quickly to her bosom, drew out
a paper, and held it toward Athos.

“Take it,” said she, “and be accursed!”

Athos took the paper, returned the pistol to his belt, approached the
lamp to be assured that it was the paper, unfolded it, and read:

“Dec. 3, 1627


“It is by my order and for the good of the state that the bearer of
this has done what he has done.


“RICHELIEU”


“And now,” said Athos, resuming his cloak and putting on his hat, “now
that I have drawn your teeth, viper, bite if you can.”

And he left the chamber without once looking behind him.

At the door he found the two men and the spare horse which they held.

“Gentlemen,” said he, “Monseigneur’s order is, you know, to conduct
that woman, without losing time, to Fort La Pointe, and never to leave
her till she is on board.”

As these words agreed wholly with the order they had received, they
bowed their heads in sign of assent.

With regard to Athos, he leaped lightly into the saddle and set out at
full gallop; only instead of following the road, he went across the
fields, urging his horse to the utmost and stopping occasionally to
listen.

In one of those halts he heard the steps of several horses on the road.
He had no doubt it was the cardinal and his escort. He immediately made
a new point in advance, rubbed his horse down with some heath and
leaves of trees, and placed himself across the road, about two hundred
paces from the camp.

“Who goes there?” cried he, as soon as he perceived the horsemen.

“That is our brave Musketeer, I think,” said the cardinal.

“Yes, monseigneur,” said Porthos, “it is he.”

“Monsieur Athos,” said Richelieu, “receive my thanks for the good guard
you have kept. Gentlemen, we are arrived; take the gate on the left.
The watchword is, ‘King and Ré.’”

Saying these words, the cardinal saluted the three friends with an
inclination of his head, and took the right hand, followed by his
attendant—for that night he himself slept in the camp.

“Well!” said Porthos and Aramis together, as soon as the cardinal was
out of hearing, “well, he signed the paper she required!”

“I know it,” said Athos, coolly, “since here it is.”

And the three friends did not exchange another word till they reached
their quarters, except to give the watchword to the sentinels. Only
they sent Mousqueton to tell Planchet that his master was requested,
the instant that he left the trenches, to come to the quarters of the
Musketeers.

Milady, as Athos had foreseen, on finding the two men that awaited her,
made no difficulty in following them. She had had for an instant an
inclination to be reconducted to the cardinal, and relate everything to
him; but a revelation on her part would bring about a revelation on the
part of Athos. She might say that Athos had hanged her; but then Athos
would tell that she was branded. She thought it was best to preserve
silence, to discreetly set off to accomplish her difficult mission with
her usual skill; and then, all things being accomplished to the
satisfaction of the cardinal, to come to him and claim her vengeance.

In consequence, after having traveled all night, at seven o’clock she
was at the fort of the Point; at eight o’clock she had embarked; and at
nine, the vessel, which with letters of marque from the cardinal was
supposed to be sailing for Bayonne, raised anchor, and steered its
course toward England.
