Chapter LI.
OFFICER


Meanwhile, the cardinal looked anxiously for news from England; but no
news arrived that was not annoying and threatening.

Although La Rochelle was invested, however certain success might
appear—thanks to the precautions taken, and above all to the dyke,
which prevented the entrance of any vessel into the besieged city—the
blockade might last a long time yet. This was a great affront to the
king’s army, and a great inconvenience to the cardinal, who had no
longer, it is true, to embroil Louis XIII. with Anne of Austria—for that
affair was over—but he had to adjust matters for M. de Bassompierre,
who was embroiled with the Duc d’Angoulême.

As to Monsieur, who had begun the siege, he left to the cardinal the
task of finishing it.

The city, notwithstanding the incredible perseverance of its mayor, had
attempted a sort of mutiny for a surrender; the mayor had hanged the
mutineers. This execution quieted the ill-disposed, who resolved to
allow themselves to die of hunger—this death always appearing to them
more slow and less sure than strangulation.

On their side, from time to time, the besiegers took the messengers
which the Rochellais sent to Buckingham, or the spies which Buckingham
sent to the Rochellais. In one case or the other, the trial was soon
over. The cardinal pronounced the single word, “Hanged!” The king was
invited to come and see the hanging. He came languidly, placing himself
in a good situation to see all the details. This amused him sometimes a
little, and made him endure the siege with patience; but it did not
prevent his getting very tired, or from talking at every moment of
returning to Paris—so that if the messengers and the spies had failed,
his Eminence, notwithstanding all his inventiveness, would have found
himself much embarrassed.

Nevertheless, time passed on, and the Rochellais did not surrender. The
last spy that was taken was the bearer of a letter. This letter told
Buckingham that the city was at an extremity; but instead of adding,
“If your succor does not arrive within fifteen days, we will
surrender,” it added, quite simply, “If your succor comes not within
fifteen days, we shall all be dead with hunger when it comes.”

The Rochellais, then, had no hope but in Buckingham. Buckingham was
their Messiah. It was evident that if they one day learned positively
that they must not count on Buckingham, their courage would fail with
their hope.

The cardinal looked, then, with great impatience for the news from
England which would announce to him that Buckingham would not come.

The question of carrying the city by assault, though often debated in
the council of the king, had been always rejected. In the first place,
La Rochelle appeared impregnable. Then the cardinal, whatever he said,
very well knew that the horror of bloodshed in this encounter, in which
Frenchman would combat against Frenchman, was a retrograde movement of
sixty years impressed upon his policy; and the cardinal was at that
period what we now call a man of progress. In fact, the sack of La
Rochelle, and the assassination of three of four thousand Huguenots who
allowed themselves to be killed, would resemble too closely, in 1628,
the massacre of St. Bartholomew in 1572; and then, above all this, this
extreme measure, which was not at all repugnant to the king, good
Catholic as he was, always fell before this argument of the besieging
generals—La Rochelle is impregnable except to famine.

The cardinal could not drive from his mind the fear he entertained of
his terrible emissary—for he comprehended the strange qualities of this
woman, sometimes a serpent, sometimes a lion. Had she betrayed him? Was
she dead? He knew her well enough in all cases to know that, whether
acting for or against him, as a friend or an enemy, she would not
remain motionless without great impediments; but whence did these
impediments arise? That was what he could not know.

And yet he reckoned, and with reason, on Milady. He had divined in the
past of this woman terrible things which his red mantle alone could
cover; and he felt, from one cause or another, that this woman was his
own, as she could look to no other but himself for a support superior
to the danger which threatened her.

He resolved, then, to carry on the war alone, and to look for no
success foreign to himself, but as we look for a fortunate chance. He
continued to press the raising of the famous dyke which was to starve
La Rochelle. Meanwhile, he cast his eyes over that unfortunate city,
which contained so much deep misery and so many heroic virtues, and
recalling the saying of Louis XI., his political predecessor, as he
himself was the predecessor of Robespierre, he repeated this maxim of
Tristan’s gossip: “Divide in order to reign.”

Henry IV., when besieging Paris, had loaves and provisions thrown over
the walls. The cardinal had little notes thrown over in which he
represented to the Rochellais how unjust, selfish, and barbarous was
the conduct of their leaders. These leaders had corn in abundance, and
would not let them partake of it; they adopted as a maxim—for they,
too, had maxims—that it was of very little consequence that women,
children, and old men should die, so long as the men who were to defend
the walls remained strong and healthy. Up to that time, whether from
devotedness or from want of power to act against it, this maxim,
without being generally adopted, nevertheless passed from theory into
practice; but the notes did it injury. The notes reminded the men that
the children, women, and old men whom they allowed to die were their
sons, their wives, and their fathers, and that it would be more just
for everyone to be reduced to the common misery, in order that equal
conditions should give birth to unanimous resolutions.

These notes had all the effect that he who wrote them could expect, in
that they induced a great number of the inhabitants to open private
negotiations with the royal army.

But at the moment when the cardinal saw his means already bearing
fruit, and applauded himself for having put it in action, an inhabitant
of La Rochelle who had contrived to pass the royal lines—God knows how,
such was the watchfulness of Bassompierre, Schomberg, and the Duc
d’Angoulême, themselves watched over by the cardinal—an inhabitant of
La Rochelle, we say, entered the city, coming from Portsmouth, and
saying that he had seen a magnificent fleet ready to sail within eight
days. Still further, Buckingham announced to the mayor that at length
the great league was about to declare itself against France, and that
the kingdom would be at once invaded by the English, Imperial, and
Spanish armies. This letter was read publicly in all parts of the city.
Copies were put up at the corners of the streets; and even they who had
begun to open negotiations interrupted them, being resolved to await
the succor so pompously announced.

This unexpected circumstance brought back Richelieu’s former anxiety,
and forced him in spite of himself once more to turn his eyes to the
other side of the sea.

During this time, exempt from the anxiety of its only and true chief,
the royal army led a joyous life, neither provisions nor money being
wanting in the camp. All the corps rivaled one another in audacity and
gaiety. To take spies and hang them, to make hazardous expeditions upon
the dyke or the sea, to imagine wild plans, and to execute them
coolly—such were the pastimes which made the army find these days short
which were not only so long to the Rochellais, a prey to famine and
anxiety, but even to the cardinal, who blockaded them so closely.

Sometimes when the cardinal, always on horseback, like the lowest
_gendarme_ of the army, cast a pensive glance over those works, so
slowly keeping pace with his wishes, which the engineers, brought from
all the corners of France, were executing under his orders, if he met a
Musketeer of the company of Tréville, he drew near and looked at him in
a peculiar manner, and not recognizing in him one of our four
companions, he turned his penetrating look and profound thoughts in
another direction.

One day when oppressed with a mortal weariness of mind, without hope in
the negotiations with the city, without news from England, the cardinal
went out, without any other aim than to be out of doors, and
accompanied only by Cahusac and La Houdinière, strolled along the
beach. Mingling the immensity of his dreams with the immensity of the
ocean, he came, his horse going at a foot’s pace, to a hill from the
top of which he perceived behind a hedge, reclining on the sand and
catching in its passage one of those rays of the sun so rare at this
period of the year, seven men surrounded by empty bottles. Four of
these men were our Musketeers, preparing to listen to a letter one of
them had just received. This letter was so important that it made them
forsake their cards and their dice on the drumhead.

The other three were occupied in opening an enormous flagon of
Collicure wine; these were the lackeys of these gentlemen.

The cardinal was, as we have said, in very low spirits; and nothing
when he was in that state of mind increased his depression so much as
gaiety in others. Besides, he had another strange fancy, which was
always to believe that the causes of his sadness created the gaiety of
others. Making a sign to La Houdinière and Cahusac to stop, he alighted
from his horse, and went toward these suspected merry companions,
hoping, by means of the sand which deadened the sound of his steps and
of the hedge which concealed his approach, to catch some words of this
conversation which appeared so interesting. At ten paces from the hedge
he recognized the talkative Gascon; and as he had already perceived
that these men were Musketeers, he did not doubt that the three others
were those called the Inseparables; that is to say, Athos, Porthos, and
Aramis.

It may be supposed that his desire to hear the conversation was
augmented by this discovery. His eyes took a strange expression, and
with the step of a tiger-cat he advanced toward the hedge; but he had
not been able to catch more than a few vague syllables without any
positive sense, when a sonorous and short cry made him start, and
attracted the attention of the Musketeers.

“Officer!” cried Grimaud.

“You are speaking, you scoundrel!” said Athos, rising upon his elbow,
and transfixing Grimaud with his flaming look.

Grimaud therefore added nothing to his speech, but contented himself
with pointing his index finger in the direction of the hedge,
announcing by this gesture the cardinal and his escort.

With a single bound the Musketeers were on their feet, and saluted with
respect.

The cardinal seemed furious.

“It appears that Messieurs the Musketeers keep guard,” said he. “Are
the English expected by land, or do the Musketeers consider themselves
superior officers?”

“Monseigneur,” replied Athos, for amid the general fright he alone had
preserved the noble calmness and coolness that never forsook him,
“Monseigneur, the Musketeers, when they are not on duty, or when their
duty is over, drink and play at dice, and they are certainly superior
officers to their lackeys.”

“Lackeys?” grumbled the cardinal. “Lackeys who have the order to warn
their masters when anyone passes are not lackeys, they are sentinels.”

“Your Eminence may perceive that if we had not taken this precaution,
we should have been exposed to allowing you to pass without presenting
you our respects or offering you our thanks for the favor you have done
us in uniting us. D’Artagnan,” continued Athos, “you, who but lately
were so anxious for such an opportunity for expressing your gratitude
to Monseigneur, here it is; avail yourself of it.”

These words were pronounced with that imperturbable phlegm which
distinguished Athos in the hour of danger, and with that excessive
politeness which made of him at certain moments a king more majestic
than kings by birth.

D’Artagnan came forward and stammered out a few words of gratitude
which soon expired under the gloomy looks of the cardinal.

“It does not signify, gentlemen,” continued the cardinal, without
appearing to be in the least swerved from his first intention by the
diversion which Athos had started, “it does not signify, gentlemen. I
do not like to have simple soldiers, because they have the advantage of
serving in a privileged corps, thus to play the great lords; discipline
is the same for them as for everybody else.”

Athos allowed the cardinal to finish his sentence completely, and bowed
in sign of assent. Then he resumed in his turn: “Discipline,
Monseigneur, has, I hope, in no way been forgotten by us. We are not on
duty, and we believed that not being on duty we were at liberty to
dispose of our time as we pleased. If we are so fortunate as to have
some particular duty to perform for your Eminence, we are ready to obey
you. Your Eminence may perceive,” continued Athos, knitting his brow,
for this sort of investigation began to annoy him, “that we have not
come out without our arms.”

And he showed the cardinal, with his finger, the four muskets piled
near the drum, on which were the cards and dice.

“Your Eminence may believe,” added D’Artagnan, “that we would have come
to meet you, if we could have supposed it was Monseigneur coming toward
us with so few attendants.”

The cardinal bit his mustache, and even his lips a little.

“Do you know what you look like, all together, as you are armed and
guarded by your lackeys?” said the cardinal. “You look like four
conspirators.”

“Oh, as to that, Monseigneur, it is true,” said Athos; “we do conspire,
as your Eminence might have seen the other morning. Only we conspire
against the Rochellais.”

“Ah, you gentlemen of policy!” replied the cardinal, knitting his brow
in his turn, “the secret of many unknown things might perhaps be found
in your brains, if we could read them as you read that letter which you
concealed as soon as you saw me coming.”

The color mounted to the face of Athos, and he made a step toward his
Eminence.

“One might think you really suspected us, monseigneur, and we were
undergoing a real interrogatory. If it be so, we trust your Eminence
will deign to explain yourself, and we should then at least be
acquainted with our real position.”

“And if it were an interrogatory!” replied the cardinal. “Others
besides you have undergone such, Monsieur Athos, and have replied
thereto.”

“Thus I have told your Eminence that you had but to question us, and we
are ready to reply.”

“What was that letter you were about to read, Monsieur Aramis, and
which you so promptly concealed?”

“A woman’s letter, monseigneur.”

“Ah, yes, I see,” said the cardinal; “we must be discreet with this
sort of letters; but nevertheless, we may show them to a confessor, and
you know I have taken orders.”

“Monseigneur,” said Athos, with a calmness the more terrible because he
risked his head in making this reply, “the letter is a woman’s letter,
but it is neither signed Marion de Lorme, nor Madame d’Aiguillon.”

The cardinal became as pale as death; lightning darted from his eyes.
He turned round as if to give an order to Cahusac and Houdinière. Athos
saw the movement; he made a step toward the muskets, upon which the
other three friends had fixed their eyes, like men ill-disposed to
allow themselves to be taken. The cardinalists were three; the
Musketeers, lackeys included, were seven. He judged that the match
would be so much the less equal, if Athos and his companions were
really plotting; and by one of those rapid turns which he always had at
command, all his anger faded away into a smile.

“Well, well!” said he, “you are brave young men, proud in daylight,
faithful in darkness. We can find no fault with you for watching over
yourselves, when you watch so carefully over others. Gentlemen, I have
not forgotten the night in which you served me as an escort to the Red
Dovecot. If there were any danger to be apprehended on the road I am
going, I would request you to accompany me; but as there is none,
remain where you are, finish your bottles, your game, and your letter.
Adieu, gentlemen!”

And remounting his horse, which Cahusac led to him, he saluted them
with his hand, and rode away.

The four young men, standing and motionless, followed him with their
eyes without speaking a single word until he had disappeared. Then they
looked at one another.

The countenances of all gave evidence of terror, for notwithstanding
the friendly adieu of his Eminence, they plainly perceived that the
cardinal went away with rage in his heart.

Athos alone smiled, with a self-possessed, disdainful smile.

When the cardinal was out of hearing and sight, “That Grimaud kept bad
watch!” cried Porthos, who had a great inclination to vent his
ill-humor on somebody.

Grimaud was about to reply to excuse himself. Athos lifted his finger,
and Grimaud was silent.

“Would you have given up the letter, Aramis?” said D’Artagnan.

“I,” said Aramis, in his most flutelike tone, “I had made up my mind.
If he had insisted upon the letter being given up to him, I would have
presented the letter to him with one hand, and with the other I would
have run my sword through his body.”

“I expected as much,” said Athos; “and that was why I threw myself
between you and him. Indeed, this man is very much to blame for talking
thus to other men; one would say he had never had to do with any but
women and children.”

“My dear Athos, I admire you, but nevertheless we were in the wrong,
after all.”

“How, in the wrong?” said Athos. “Whose, then, is the air we breathe?
Whose is the ocean upon which we look? Whose is the sand upon which we
were reclining? Whose is that letter of your mistress? Do these belong
to the cardinal? Upon my honor, this man fancies the world belongs to
him. There you stood, stammering, stupefied, annihilated. One might
have supposed the Bastille appeared before you, and that the gigantic
Medusa had converted you into stone. Is being in love conspiring? You
are in love with a woman whom the cardinal has caused to be shut up,
and you wish to get her out of the hands of the cardinal. That’s a
match you are playing with his Eminence; this letter is your game. Why
should you expose your game to your adversary? That is never done. Let
him find it out if he can! We can find out his!”

“Well, that’s all very sensible, Athos,” said D’Artagnan.

“In that case, let there be no more question of what’s past, and let
Aramis resume the letter from his cousin where the cardinal interrupted
him.”

Aramis drew the letter from his pocket; the three friends surrounded
him, and the three lackeys grouped themselves again near the wine jar.

“You had only read a line or two,” said D’Artagnan; “read the letter
again from the commencement.”

“Willingly,” said Aramis.

“MY DEAR COUSIN, I think I shall make up my mind to set out for
Béthune, where my sister has placed our little servant in the convent
of the Carmelites; this poor child is quite resigned, as she knows she
cannot live elsewhere without the salvation of her soul being in
danger. Nevertheless, if the affairs of our family are arranged, as we
hope they will be, I believe she will run the risk of being damned, and
will return to those she regrets, particularly as she knows they are
always thinking of her. Meanwhile, she is not very wretched; what she
most desires is a letter from her intended. I know that such viands
pass with difficulty through convent gratings; but after all, as I have
given you proofs, my dear cousin, I am not unskilled in such affairs,
and I will take charge of the commission. My sister thanks you for your
good and eternal remembrance. She has experienced much anxiety; but she
is now at length a little reassured, having sent her secretary away in
order that nothing may happen unexpectedly.
    “Adieu, my dear cousin. Tell us news of yourself as often as you
    can; that is to say, as often as you can with safety. I embrace
    you.


“MARIE MICHON”


“Oh, what do I not owe you, Aramis?” said D’Artagnan. “Dear Constance!
I have at length, then, intelligence of you. She lives; she is in
safety in a convent; she is at Béthune! Where is Béthune, Athos?”

“Why, upon the frontiers of Artois and of Flanders. The siege once
over, we shall be able to make a tour in that direction.”

“And that will not be long, it is to be hoped,” said Porthos; “for they
have this morning hanged a spy who confessed that the Rochellais were
reduced to the leather of their shoes. Supposing that after having
eaten the leather they eat the soles, I cannot see much that is left
unless they eat one another.”

“Poor fools!” said Athos, emptying a glass of excellent Bordeaux wine
which, without having at that period the reputation it now enjoys,
merited it no less, “poor fools! As if the Catholic religion was not
the most advantageous and the most agreeable of all religions! All the
same,” resumed he, after having clicked his tongue against his palate,
“they are brave fellows! But what the devil are you about, Aramis?”
continued Athos. “Why, you are squeezing that letter into your pocket!”

“Yes,” said D’Artagnan, “Athos is right, it must be burned. And yet if
we burn it, who knows whether Monsieur Cardinal has not a secret to
interrogate ashes?”

“He must have one,” said Athos.

“What will you do with the letter, then?” asked Porthos.

“Come here, Grimaud,” said Athos. Grimaud rose and obeyed. “As a
punishment for having spoken without permission, my friend, you will
please to eat this piece of paper; then to recompense you for the
service you will have rendered us, you shall afterward drink this glass
of wine. First, here is the letter. Eat heartily.”

Grimaud smiled; and with his eyes fixed upon the glass which Athos held
in his hand, he ground the paper well between his teeth and then
swallowed it.

“Bravo, Monsieur Grimaud!” said Athos; “and now take this. That’s well.
We dispense with your saying grace.”

Grimaud silently swallowed the glass of Bordeaux wine; but his eyes,
raised toward heaven during this delicious occupation, spoke a language
which, though mute, was not the less expressive.

“And now,” said Athos, “unless Monsieur Cardinal should form the
ingenious idea of ripping up Grimaud, I think we may be pretty much at
our ease respecting the letter.”

Meantime, his Eminence continued his melancholy ride, murmuring between
his mustaches, “These four men must positively be mine.”




Chapter LII.
CAPTIVITY: THE FIRST DAY


Let us return to Milady, whom a glance thrown upon the coast of France
has made us lose sight of for an instant.

We shall find her still in the despairing attitude in which we left
her, plunged in an abyss of dismal reflection—a dark hell at the gate
of which she has almost left hope behind, because for the first time
she doubts, for the first time she fears.

On two occasions her fortune has failed her, on two occasions she has
found herself discovered and betrayed; and on these two occasions it
was to one fatal genius, sent doubtlessly by the Lord to combat her,
that she has succumbed. D’Artagnan has conquered her—her, that
invincible power of evil.

He has deceived her in her love, humbled her in her pride, thwarted her
in her ambition; and now he ruins her fortune, deprives her of liberty,
and even threatens her life. Still more, he has lifted the corner of
her mask—that shield with which she covered herself and which rendered
her so strong.

D’Artagnan has turned aside from Buckingham, whom she hates as she
hates everyone she has loved, the tempest with which Richelieu
threatened him in the person of the queen. D’Artagnan had passed
himself upon her as De Wardes, for whom she had conceived one of those
tigerlike fancies common to women of her character. D’Artagnan knows
that terrible secret which she has sworn no one shall know without
dying. In short, at the moment in which she has just obtained from
Richelieu a _carte blanche_ by the means of which she is about to take
vengeance on her enemy, this precious paper is torn from her hands, and
it is D’Artagnan who holds her prisoner and is about to send her to
some filthy Botany Bay, some infamous Tyburn of the Indian Ocean.

All this she owes to D’Artagnan, without doubt. From whom can come so
many disgraces heaped upon her head, if not from him? He alone could
have transmitted to Lord de Winter all these frightful secrets which he
has discovered, one after another, by a train of fatalities. He knows
her brother-in-law. He must have written to him.

What hatred she distills! Motionless, with her burning and fixed
glances, in her solitary apartment, how well the outbursts of passion
which at times escape from the depths of her chest with her
respiration, accompany the sound of the surf which rises, growls,
roars, and breaks itself like an eternal and powerless despair against
the rocks on which is built this dark and lofty castle! How many
magnificent projects of vengeance she conceives by the light of the
flashes which her tempestuous passion casts over her mind against Mme.
Bonacieux, against Buckingham, but above all against
D’Artagnan—projects lost in the distance of the future.

Yes; but in order to avenge herself she must be free. And to be free, a
prisoner has to pierce a wall, detach bars, cut through a floor—all
undertakings which a patient and strong man may accomplish, but before
which the feverish irritations of a woman must give way. Besides, to do
all this, time is necessary—months, years; and she has ten or twelve
days, as Lord de Winter, her fraternal and terrible jailer, has told
her.

And yet, if she were a man she would attempt all this, and perhaps
might succeed; why, then, did heaven make the mistake of placing that
manlike soul in that frail and delicate body?

The first moments of her captivity were terrible; a few convulsions of
rage which she could not suppress paid her debt of feminine weakness to
nature. But by degrees she overcame the outbursts of her mad passion;
and nervous tremblings which agitated her frame disappeared, and she
remained folded within herself like a fatigued serpent in repose.

“Go to, go to! I must have been mad to allow myself to be carried away
so,” says she, gazing into the glass, which reflects back to her eyes
the burning glance by which she appears to interrogate herself. “No
violence; violence is the proof of weakness. In the first place, I have
never succeeded by that means. Perhaps if I employed my strength
against women I might perchance find them weaker than myself, and
consequently conquer them; but it is with men that I struggle, and I am
but a woman to them. Let me fight like a woman, then; my strength is in
my weakness.”

Then, as if to render an account to herself of the changes she could
place upon her countenance, so mobile and so expressive, she made it
take all expressions from that of passionate anger, which convulsed her
features, to that of the most sweet, most affectionate, and most
seducing smile. Then her hair assumed successively, under her skillful
hands, all the undulations she thought might assist the charms of her
face. At length she murmured, satisfied with herself, “Come, nothing is
lost; I am still beautiful.”

It was then nearly eight o’clock in the evening. Milady perceived a
bed; she calculated that the repose of a few hours would not only
refresh her head and her ideas, but still further, her complexion. A
better idea, however, came into her mind before going to bed. She had
heard something said about supper. She had already been an hour in this
apartment; they could not long delay bringing her a repast. The
prisoner did not wish to lose time; and she resolved to make that very
evening some attempts to ascertain the nature of the ground she had to
work upon, by studying the characters of the men to whose guardianship
she was committed.

A light appeared under the door; this light announced the reappearance
of her jailers. Milady, who had arisen, threw herself quickly into the
armchair, her head thrown back, her beautiful hair unbound and
disheveled, her bosom half bare beneath her crumpled lace, one hand on
her heart, and the other hanging down.

The bolts were drawn; the door groaned upon its hinges. Steps sounded
in the chamber, and drew near.

“Place that table there,” said a voice which the prisoner recognized as
that of Felton.

The order was executed.

“You will bring lights, and relieve the sentinel,” continued Felton.

And this double order which the young lieutenant gave to the same
individuals proved to Milady that her servants were the same men as her
guards; that is to say, soldiers.

Felton’s orders were, for the rest, executed with a silent rapidity
that gave a good idea of the way in which he maintained discipline.

At length Felton, who had not yet looked at Milady, turned toward her.

“Ah, ah!” said he, “she is asleep; that’s well. When she wakes she can
sup.” And he made some steps toward the door.

“But, my lieutenant,” said a soldier, less stoical than his chief, and
who had approached Milady, “this woman is not asleep.”

“What, not asleep!” said Felton; “what is she doing, then?”

“She has fainted. Her face is very pale, and I have listened in vain; I
do not hear her breathe.”

“You are right,” said Felton, after having looked at Milady from the
spot on which he stood without moving a step toward her. “Go and tell
Lord de Winter that his prisoner has fainted—for this event not having
been foreseen, I don’t know what to do.”

The soldier went out to obey the orders of his officer. Felton sat down
upon an armchair which happened to be near the door, and waited without
speaking a word, without making a gesture. Milady possessed that great
art, so much studied by women, of looking through her long eyelashes
without appearing to open the lids. She perceived Felton, who sat with
his back toward her. She continued to look at him for nearly ten
minutes, and in these ten minutes the immovable guardian never turned
round once.

She then thought that Lord de Winter would come, and by his presence
give fresh strength to her jailer. Her first trial was lost; she acted
like a woman who reckons up her resources. As a result she raised her
head, opened her eyes, and sighed deeply.

At this sigh Felton turned round.

“Ah, you are awake, madame,” he said; “then I have nothing more to do
here. If you want anything you can ring.”

“Oh, my God, my God! how I have suffered!” said Milady, in that
harmonious voice which, like that of the ancient enchantresses, charmed
all whom she wished to destroy.

And she assumed, upon sitting up in the armchair, a still more graceful
and abandoned position than when she reclined.

Felton arose.

“You will be served, thus, madame, three times a day,” said he. “In the
morning at nine o’clock, in the day at one o’clock, and in the evening
at eight. If that does not suit you, you can point out what other hours
you prefer, and in this respect your wishes will be complied with.”

“But am I to remain always alone in this vast and dismal chamber?”
asked Milady.

“A woman of the neighbourhood has been sent for, who will be tomorrow
at the castle, and will return as often as you desire her presence.”

“I thank you, sir,” replied the prisoner, humbly.

Felton made a slight bow, and directed his steps toward the door. At
the moment he was about to go out, Lord de Winter appeared in the
corridor, followed by the soldier who had been sent to inform him of
the swoon of Milady. He held a vial of salts in his hand.

“Well, what is it—what is going on here?” said he, in a jeering voice,
on seeing the prisoner sitting up and Felton about to go out. “Is this
corpse come to life already? Felton, my lad, did you not perceive that
you were taken for a novice, and that the first act was being performed
of a comedy of which we shall doubtless have the pleasure of following
out all the developments?”

“I thought so, my lord,” said Felton; “but as the prisoner is a woman,
after all, I wish to pay her the attention that every man of gentle
birth owes to a woman, if not on her account, at least on my own.”

Milady shuddered through her whole system. These words of Felton’s
passed like ice through her veins.

“So,” replied de Winter, laughing, “that beautiful hair so skillfully
disheveled, that white skin, and that languishing look, have not yet
seduced you, you heart of stone?”

“No, my Lord,” replied the impassive young man; “your Lordship may be
assured that it requires more than the tricks and coquetry of a woman
to corrupt me.”

“In that case, my brave lieutenant, let us leave Milady to find out
something else, and go to supper; but be easy! She has a fruitful
imagination, and the second act of the comedy will not delay its steps
after the first.”

And at these words Lord de Winter passed his arm through that of
Felton, and led him out, laughing.

“Oh, I will be a match for you!” murmured Milady, between her teeth;
“be assured of that, you poor spoiled monk, you poor converted soldier,
who has cut his uniform out of a monk’s frock!”

“By the way,” resumed de Winter, stopping at the threshold of the door,
“you must not, Milady, let this check take away your appetite. Taste
that fowl and those fish. On my honor, they are not poisoned. I have a
very good cook, and he is not to be my heir; I have full and perfect
confidence in him. Do as I do. Adieu, dear sister, till your next
swoon!”

This was all that Milady could endure. Her hands clutched her armchair;
she ground her teeth inwardly; her eyes followed the motion of the door
as it closed behind Lord de Winter and Felton, and the moment she was
alone a fresh fit of despair seized her. She cast her eyes upon the
table, saw the glittering of a knife, rushed toward it and clutched it;
but her disappointment was cruel. The blade was round, and of flexible
silver.

A burst of laughter resounded from the other side of the ill-closed
door, and the door reopened.

“Ha, ha!” cried Lord de Winter; “ha, ha! Don’t you see, my brave
Felton; don’t you see what I told you? That knife was for you, my lad;
she would have killed you. Observe, this is one of her peculiarities,
to get rid thus, after one fashion or another, of all the people who
bother her. If I had listened to you, the knife would have been pointed
and of steel. Then no more of Felton; she would have cut your throat,
and after that everybody else’s. See, John, see how well she knows how
to handle a knife.”

In fact, Milady still held the harmless weapon in her clenched hand;
but these last words, this supreme insult, relaxed her hands, her
strength, and even her will. The knife fell to the ground.

“You were right, my Lord,” said Felton, with a tone of profound disgust
which sounded to the very bottom of the heart of Milady, “you were
right, my Lord, and I was wrong.”

And both again left the room.

But this time Milady lent a more attentive ear than the first, and she
heard their steps die away in the distance of the corridor.

“I am lost,” murmured she; “I am lost! I am in the power of men upon
whom I can have no more influence than upon statues of bronze or
granite; they know me by heart, and are steeled against all my weapons.
It is, however, impossible that this should end as they have decreed!”

In fact, as this last reflection indicated—this instinctive return to
hope—sentiments of weakness or fear did not dwell long in her ardent
spirit. Milady sat down to table, ate from several dishes, drank a
little Spanish wine, and felt all her resolution return.

Before she went to bed she had pondered, analyzed, turned on all sides,
examined on all points, the words, the steps, the gestures, the signs,
and even the silence of her interlocutors; and of this profound,
skillful, and anxious study the result was that Felton, everything
considered, appeared the more vulnerable of her two persecutors.

One expression above all recurred to the mind of the prisoner: “If I
had listened to you,” Lord de Winter had said to Felton.

Felton, then, had spoken in her favor, since Lord de Winter had not
been willing to listen to him.

“Weak or strong,” repeated Milady, “that man has, then, a spark of pity
in his soul; of that spark I will make a flame that shall devour him.
As to the other, he knows me, he fears me, and knows what he has to
expect of me if ever I escape from his hands. It is useless, then, to
attempt anything with him. But Felton—that’s another thing. He is a
young, ingenuous, pure man who seems virtuous; him there are means of
destroying.”

And Milady went to bed and fell asleep with a smile upon her lips.
Anyone who had seen her sleeping might have said she was a young girl
dreaming of the crown of flowers she was to wear on her brow at the
next festival.




Chapter LIII.
CAPTIVITY: THE SECOND DAY


Milady dreamed that she at length had D’Artagnan in her power, that she
was present at his execution; and it was the sight of his odious blood,
flowing beneath the ax of the headsman, which spread that charming
smile upon her lips.

She slept as a prisoner sleeps, rocked by his first hope.

In the morning, when they entered her chamber she was still in bed.
Felton remained in the corridor. He brought with him the woman of whom
he had spoken the evening before, and who had just arrived; this woman
entered, and approaching Milady’s bed, offered her services.

Milady was habitually pale; her complexion might therefore deceive a
person who saw her for the first time.

“I am in a fever,” said she; “I have not slept a single instant during
all this long night. I suffer horribly. Are you likely to be more
humane to me than others were yesterday? All I ask is permission to
remain abed.”

“Would you like to have a physician called?” said the woman.

Felton listened to this dialogue without speaking a word.

Milady reflected that the more people she had around her the more she
would have to work upon, and Lord de Winter would redouble his watch.
Besides, the physician might declare the ailment feigned; and Milady,
after having lost the first trick, was not willing to lose the second.

“Go and fetch a physician?” said she. “What could be the good of that?
These gentlemen declared yesterday that my illness was a comedy; it
would be just the same today, no doubt—for since yesterday evening they
have had plenty of time to send for a doctor.”

“Then,” said Felton, who became impatient, “say yourself, madame, what
treatment you wish followed.”

“Eh, how can I tell? My God! I know that I suffer, that’s all. Give me
anything you like, it is of little consequence.”

“Go and fetch Lord de Winter,” said Felton, tired of these eternal
complaints.

“Oh, no, no!” cried Milady; “no, sir, do not call him, I conjure you. I
am well, I want nothing; do not call him.”

She gave so much vehemence, such magnetic eloquence to this
exclamation, that Felton in spite of himself advanced some steps into
the room.

“He has come!” thought Milady.

“Meanwhile, madame, if you really suffer,” said Felton, “a physician
shall be sent for; and if you deceive us—well, it will be the worse for
you. But at least we shall not have to reproach ourselves with
anything.”

Milady made no reply, but turning her beautiful head round upon her
pillow, she burst into tears, and uttered heartbreaking sobs.

Felton surveyed her for an instant with his usual impassiveness; then,
seeing that the crisis threatened to be prolonged, he went out. The
woman followed him, and Lord de Winter did not appear.

“I fancy I begin to see my way,” murmured Milady, with a savage joy,
burying herself under the clothes to conceal from anybody who might be
watching her this burst of inward satisfaction.

Two hours passed away.

“Now it is time that the malady should be over,” said she; “let me
rise, and obtain some success this very day. I have but ten days, and
this evening two of them will be gone.”

In the morning, when they entered Milady’s chamber they had brought her
breakfast. Now, she thought, they could not long delay coming to clear
the table, and that Felton would then reappear.

Milady was not deceived. Felton reappeared, and without observing
whether Milady had or had not touched her repast, made a sign that the
table should be carried out of the room, it having been brought in
ready spread.

Felton remained behind; he held a book in his hand.

Milady, reclining in an armchair near the chimney, beautiful, pale, and
resigned, looked like a holy virgin awaiting martyrdom.

Felton approached her, and said, “Lord de Winter, who is a Catholic,
like yourself, madame, thinking that the deprivation of the rites and
ceremonies of your church might be painful to you, has consented that
you should read every day the ordinary of your Mass; and here is a book
which contains the ritual.”

At the manner in which Felton laid the book upon the little table near
which Milady was sitting, at the tone in which he pronounced the two
words, _your Mass_, at the disdainful smile with which he accompanied
them, Milady raised her head, and looked more attentively at the
officer.

By that plain arrangement of the hair, by that costume of extreme
simplicity, by the brow polished like marble and as hard and
impenetrable, she recognized one of those gloomy Puritans she had so
often met, not only in the court of King James, but in that of the King
of France, where, in spite of the remembrance of the St. Bartholomew,
they sometimes came to seek refuge.

She then had one of those sudden inspirations which only people of
genius receive in great crises, in supreme moments which are to decide
their fortunes or their lives.

Those two words, _your Mass_, and a simple glance cast upon Felton,
revealed to her all the importance of the reply she was about to make;
but with that rapidity of intelligence which was peculiar to her, this
reply, ready arranged, presented itself to her lips:

“I?” said she, with an accent of disdain in unison with that which she
had remarked in the voice of the young officer, “I, sir? _My Mass?_
Lord de Winter, the corrupted Catholic, knows very well that I am not
of his religion, and this is a snare he wishes to lay for me!”

“And of what religion are you, then, madame?” asked Felton, with an
astonishment which in spite of the empire he held over himself he could
not entirely conceal.

“I will tell it,” cried Milady, with a feigned exultation, “on the day
when I shall have suffered sufficiently for my faith.”

The look of Felton revealed to Milady the full extent of the space she
had opened for herself by this single word.

The young officer, however, remained mute and motionless; his look
alone had spoken.

“I am in the hands of my enemies,” continued she, with that tone of
enthusiasm which she knew was familiar to the Puritans. “Well, let my
God save me, or let me perish for my God! That is the reply I beg you
to make to Lord de Winter. And as to this book,” added she, pointing to
the manual with her finger but without touching it, as if she must be
contaminated by it, “you may carry it back and make use of it yourself,
for doubtless you are doubly the accomplice of Lord de Winter—the
accomplice in his persecutions, the accomplice in his heresies.”

Felton made no reply, took the book with the same appearance of
repugnance which he had before manifested, and retired pensively.

Lord de Winter came toward five o’clock in the evening. Milady had had
time, during the whole day, to trace her plan of conduct. She received
him like a woman who had already recovered all her advantages.

“It appears,” said the baron, seating himself in the armchair opposite
that occupied by Milady, and stretching out his legs carelessly upon
the hearth, “it appears we have made a little apostasy!”

“What do you mean, sir!”

“I mean to say that since we last met you have changed your religion.
You have not by chance married a Protestant for a third husband, have
you?”

“Explain yourself, my Lord,” replied the prisoner, with majesty; “for
though I hear your words, I declare I do not understand them.”

“Then you have no religion at all; I like that best,” replied Lord de
Winter, laughing.

“Certainly that is most in accord with your own principles,” replied
Milady, frigidly.

“Oh, I confess it is all the same to me.”

“Oh, you need not avow this religious indifference, my Lord; your
debaucheries and crimes would vouch for it.”

“What, you talk of debaucheries, Madame Messalina, Lady Macbeth! Either
I misunderstand you or you are very shameless!”

“You only speak thus because you are overheard,” coolly replied Milady;
“and you wish to interest your jailers and your hangmen against me.”

“My jailers and my hangmen! Heyday, madame! you are taking a poetical
tone, and the comedy of yesterday turns to a tragedy this evening. As
to the rest, in eight days you will be where you ought to be, and my
task will be completed.”

“Infamous task! impious task!” cried Milady, with the exultation of a
victim who provokes his judge.

“My word,” said de Winter, rising, “I think the hussy is going mad!
Come, come, calm yourself, Madame Puritan, or I’ll remove you to a
dungeon. It’s my Spanish wine that has got into your head, is it not?
But never mind; that sort of intoxication is not dangerous, and will
have no bad effects.”

And Lord de Winter retired swearing, which at that period was a very
knightly habit.

Felton was indeed behind the door, and had not lost one word of this
scene. Milady had guessed aright.

“Yes, go, go!” said she to her brother; “the effects _are_ drawing
near, on the contrary; but you, weak fool, will not see them until it
is too late to shun them.”

Silence was re-established. Two hours passed away. Milady’s supper was
brought in, and she was found deeply engaged in saying her prayers
aloud—prayers which she had learned of an old servant of her second
husband, a most austere Puritan. She appeared to be in ecstasy, and did
not pay the least attention to what was going on around her. Felton
made a sign that she should not be disturbed; and when all was
arranged, he went out quietly with the soldiers.

Milady knew she might be watched, so she continued her prayers to the
end; and it appeared to her that the soldier who was on duty at her
door did not march with the same step, and seemed to listen. For the
moment she wished nothing better. She arose, came to the table, ate but
little, and drank only water.

An hour after, her table was cleared; but Milady remarked that this
time Felton did not accompany the soldiers. He feared, then, to see her
too often.

She turned toward the wall to smile—for there was in this smile such an
expression of triumph that this smile alone would have betrayed her.

She allowed, therefore, half an hour to pass away; and as at that
moment all was silence in the old castle, as nothing was heard but the
eternal murmur of the waves—that immense breaking of the ocean—with her
pure, harmonious, and powerful voice, she began the first couplet of
the psalm then in great favor with the Puritans:

“Thou leavest thy servants, Lord,
    To see if they be strong;
But soon thou dost afford
    Thy hand to lead them on.”


These verses were not excellent—very far from it; but as it is well
known, the Puritans did not pique themselves upon their poetry.

While singing, Milady listened. The soldier on guard at her door
stopped, as if he had been changed into stone. Milady was then able to
judge of the effect she had produced.

Then she continued her singing with inexpressible fervor and feeling.
It appeared to her that the sounds spread to a distance beneath the
vaulted roofs, and carried with them a magic charm to soften the hearts
of her jailers. It however likewise appeared that the soldier on duty—a
zealous Catholic, no doubt—shook off the charm, for through the door he
called: “Hold your tongue, madame! Your song is as dismal as a ‘De
profundis’; and if besides the pleasure of being in garrison here, we
must hear such things as these, no mortal can hold out.”

“Silence!” then exclaimed another stern voice which Milady recognized
as that of Felton. “What are you meddling with, stupid? Did anybody
order you to prevent that woman from singing? No. You were told to
guard her—to fire at her if she attempted to fly. Guard her! If she
flies, kill her; but don’t exceed your orders.”

An expression of unspeakable joy lightened the countenance of Milady;
but this expression was fleeting as the reflection of lightning.
Without appearing to have heard the dialogue, of which she had not lost
a word, she began again, giving to her voice all the charm, all the
power, all the seduction the demon had bestowed upon it:

“For all my tears, my cares,
    My exile, and my chains,
I have my youth, my prayers,
    And God, who counts my pains.”


Her voice, of immense power and sublime expression, gave to the rude,
unpolished poetry of these psalms a magic and an effect which the most
exalted Puritans rarely found in the songs of their brethren, and which
they were forced to ornament with all the resources of their
imagination. Felton believed he heard the singing of the angel who
consoled the three Hebrews in the furnace.

Milady continued:

“One day our doors will ope,
    With God come our desire;
And if betrays that hope,
    To death we can aspire.”


This verse, into which the terrible enchantress threw her whole soul,
completed the trouble which had seized the heart of the young officer.
He opened the door quickly; and Milady saw him appear, pale as usual,
but with his eye inflamed and almost wild.

“Why do you sing thus, and with such a voice?” said he.

“Your pardon, sir,” said Milady, with mildness. “I forgot that my songs
are out of place in this castle. I have perhaps offended you in your
creed; but it was without wishing to do so, I swear. Pardon me, then, a
fault which is perhaps great, but which certainly was involuntary.”

Milady was so beautiful at this moment, the religious ecstasy in which
she appeared to be plunged gave such an expression to her countenance,
that Felton was so dazzled that he fancied he beheld the angel whom he
had only just before heard.

“Yes, yes,” said he; “you disturb, you agitate the people who live in
the castle.”

The poor, senseless young man was not aware of the incoherence of his
words, while Milady was reading with her lynx’s eyes the very depths of
his heart.

“I will be silent, then,” said Milady, casting down her eyes with all
the sweetness she could give to her voice, with all the resignation she
could impress upon her manner.

“No, no, madame,” said Felton, “only do not sing so loud, particularly
at night.”

And at these words Felton, feeling that he could not long maintain his
severity toward his prisoner, rushed out of the room.

“You have done right, Lieutenant,” said the soldier. “Such songs
disturb the mind; and yet we become accustomed to them, her voice is so
beautiful.”




Chapter LIV.
CAPTIVITY: THE THIRD DAY


Felton had fallen; but there was still another step to be taken. He
must be retained, or rather he must be left quite alone; and Milady but
obscurely perceived the means which could lead to this result.

Still more must be done. He must be made to speak, in order that he
might be spoken to—for Milady very well knew that her greatest
seduction was in her voice, which so skillfully ran over the whole
gamut of tones from human speech to language celestial.

Yet in spite of all this seduction Milady might fail—for Felton was
forewarned, and that against the least chance. From that moment she
watched all his actions, all his words, from the simplest glance of his
eyes to his gestures—even to a breath that could be interpreted as a
sigh. In short, she studied everything, as a skillful comedian does to
whom a new part has been assigned in a line to which he is not
accustomed.

Face to face with Lord de Winter her plan of conduct was more easy. She
had laid that down the preceding evening. To remain silent and
dignified in his presence; from time to time to irritate him by
affected disdain, by a contemptuous word; to provoke him to threats and
violence which would produce a contrast with her own resignation—such
was her plan. Felton would see all; perhaps he would say nothing, but
he would see.

In the morning, Felton came as usual; but Milady allowed him to preside
over all the preparations for breakfast without addressing a word to
him. At the moment when he was about to retire, she was cheered with a
ray of hope, for she thought he was about to speak; but his lips moved
without any sound leaving his mouth, and making a powerful effort to
control himself, he sent back to his heart the words that were about to
escape from his lips, and went out. Toward midday, Lord de Winter
entered.

It was a tolerably fine winter’s day, and a ray of that pale English
sun which lights but does not warm came through the bars of her prison.

Milady was looking out at the window, and pretended not to hear the
door as it opened.

“Ah, ah!” said Lord de Winter, “after having played comedy, after
having played tragedy, we are now playing melancholy?”

The prisoner made no reply.

“Yes, yes,” continued Lord de Winter, “I understand. You would like
very well to be at liberty on that beach! You would like very well to
be in a good ship dancing upon the waves of that emerald-green sea; you
would like very well, either on land or on the ocean, to lay for me one
of those nice little ambuscades you are so skillful in planning.
Patience, patience! In four days’ time the shore will be beneath your
feet, the sea will be open to you—more open than will perhaps be
agreeable to you, for in four days England will be relieved of you.”

Milady folded her hands, and raising her fine eyes toward heaven,
“Lord, Lord,” said she, with an angelic meekness of gesture and tone,
“pardon this man, as I myself pardon him.”

“Yes, pray, accursed woman!” cried the baron; “your prayer is so much
the more generous from your being, I swear to you, in the power of a
man who will never pardon you!” and he went out.

At the moment he went out a piercing glance darted through the opening
of the nearly closed door, and she perceived Felton, who drew quickly
to one side to prevent being seen by her.

Then she threw herself upon her knees, and began to pray.

“My God, my God!” said she, “thou knowest in what holy cause I suffer;
give me, then, strength to suffer.”

The door opened gently; the beautiful supplicant pretended not to hear
the noise, and in a voice broken by tears, she continued:

“God of vengeance! God of goodness! wilt thou allow the frightful
projects of this man to be accomplished?”

Then only she pretended to hear the sound of Felton’s steps, and rising
quick as thought, she blushed, as if ashamed of being surprised on her
knees.

“I do not like to disturb those who pray, madame,” said Felton,
seriously; “do not disturb yourself on my account, I beseech you.”

“How do you know I was praying, sir?” said Milady, in a voice broken by
sobs. “You were deceived, sir; I was not praying.”

“Do you think, then, madame,” replied Felton, in the same serious
voice, but with a milder tone, “do you think I assume the right of
preventing a creature from prostrating herself before her Creator? God
forbid! Besides, repentance becomes the guilty; whatever crimes they
may have committed, for me the guilty are sacred at the feet of God!”

“Guilty? I?” said Milady, with a smile which might have disarmed the
angel of the last judgment. “Guilty? Oh, my God, thou knowest whether I
am guilty! Say I am condemned, sir, if you please; but you know that
God, who loves martyrs, sometimes permits the innocent to be
condemned.”

“Were you condemned, were you innocent, were you a martyr,” replied
Felton, “the greater would be the necessity for prayer; and I myself
would aid you with my prayers.”

“Oh, you are a just man!” cried Milady, throwing herself at his feet.
“I can hold out no longer, for I fear I shall be wanting in strength at
the moment when I shall be forced to undergo the struggle, and confess
my faith. Listen, then, to the supplication of a despairing woman. You
are abused, sir; but that is not the question. I only ask you one
favor; and if you grant it me, I will bless you in this world and in
the next.”

“Speak to the master, madame,” said Felton; “happily I am neither
charged with the power of pardoning nor punishing. It is upon one
higher placed than I am that God has laid this responsibility.”

“To you—no, to you alone! Listen to me, rather than add to my
destruction, rather than add to my ignominy!”

“If you have merited this shame, madame, if you have incurred this
ignominy, you must submit to it as an offering to God.”

“What do you say? Oh, you do not understand me! When I speak of
ignominy, you think I speak of some chastisement, of imprisonment or
death. Would to heaven! Of what consequence to me is imprisonment or
death?”

“It is I who no longer understand you, madame,” said Felton.

“Or, rather, who pretend not to understand me, sir!” replied the
prisoner, with a smile of incredulity.

“No, madame, on the honor of a soldier, on the faith of a Christian.”

“What, you are ignorant of Lord de Winter’s designs upon me?”

“I am.”

“Impossible; you are his confidant!”

“I never lie, madame.”

“Oh, he conceals them too little for you not to divine them.”

“I seek to divine nothing, madame; I wait till I am confided in, and
apart from that which Lord de Winter has said to me before you, he has
confided nothing to me.”

“Why, then,” cried Milady, with an incredible tone of truthfulness,
“you are not his accomplice; you do not know that he destines me to a
disgrace which all the punishments of the world cannot equal in
horror?”

“You are deceived, madame,” said Felton, blushing; “Lord de Winter is
not capable of such a crime.”

“Good,” said Milady to herself; “without thinking what it is, he calls
it a crime!” Then aloud, “The friend of that wretch is capable of
everything.”

“Whom do you call _that wretch?_” asked Felton.

“Are there, then, in England two men to whom such an epithet can be
applied?”

“You mean George Villiers?” asked Felton, whose looks became excited.

“Whom Pagans and unbelieving Gentiles call Duke of Buckingham,” replied
Milady. “I could not have thought that there was an Englishman in all
England who would have required so long an explanation to make him
understand of whom I was speaking.”

“The hand of the Lord is stretched over him,” said Felton; “he will not
escape the chastisement he deserves.”

Felton only expressed, with regard to the duke, the feeling of
execration which all the English had declared toward him whom the
Catholics themselves called the extortioner, the pillager, the
debauchee, and whom the Puritans styled simply Satan.

“Oh, my God, my God!” cried Milady; “when I supplicate thee to pour
upon this man the chastisement which is his due, thou knowest it is not
my own vengeance I pursue, but the deliverance of a whole nation that I
implore!”

“Do you know him, then?” asked Felton.

“At length he interrogates me!” said Milady to herself, at the height
of joy at having obtained so quickly such a great result. “Oh, know
him? Yes, yes! to my misfortune, to my eternal misfortune!” and Milady
twisted her arms as if in a paroxysm of grief.

Felton no doubt felt within himself that his strength was abandoning
him, and he made several steps toward the door; but the prisoner, whose
eye never left him, sprang in pursuit of him and stopped him.

“Sir,” cried she, “be kind, be clement, listen to my prayer! That
knife, which the fatal prudence of the baron deprived me of, because he
knows the use I would make of it! Oh, hear me to the end! that knife,
give it to me for a minute only, for mercy’s, for pity’s sake! I will
embrace your knees! You shall shut the door that you may be certain I
contemplate no injury to you! My God! to you—the only just, good, and
compassionate being I have met with! To you—my preserver, perhaps! One
minute that knife, one minute, a single minute, and I will restore it
to you through the grating of the door. Only one minute, Mr. Felton,
and you will have saved my honor!”

“To kill yourself?” cried Felton, with terror, forgetting to withdraw
his hands from the hands of the prisoner, “to kill yourself?”

“I have told, sir,” murmured Milady, lowering her voice, and allowing
herself to sink overpowered to the ground; “I have told my secret! He
knows all! My God, I am lost!”

Felton remained standing, motionless and undecided.

“He still doubts,” thought Milady; “I have not been earnest enough.”

Someone was heard in the corridor; Milady recognized the step of Lord
de Winter.

Felton recognized it also, and made a step toward the door.

Milady sprang toward him. “Oh, not a word,” said she in a concentrated
voice, “not a word of all that I have said to you to this man, or I am
lost, and it would be you—you—”

Then as the steps drew near, she became silent for fear of being heard,
applying, with a gesture of infinite terror, her beautiful hand to
Felton’s mouth.

Felton gently repulsed Milady, and she sank into a chair.

Lord de Winter passed before the door without stopping, and they heard
the noise of his footsteps soon die away.

Felton, as pale as death, remained some instants with his ear bent and
listening; then, when the sound was quite extinct, he breathed like a
man awaking from a dream, and rushed out of the apartment.

“Ah!” said Milady, listening in her turn to the noise of Felton’s
steps, which withdrew in a direction opposite to those of Lord de
Winter; “at length you are mine!”

Then her brow darkened. “If he tells the baron,” said she, “I am
lost—for the baron, who knows very well that I shall not kill myself,
will place me before him with a knife in my hand, and he will discover
that all this despair is but acted.”

She placed herself before the glass, and regarded herself attentively;
never had she appeared more beautiful.

“Oh, yes,” said she, smiling, “but we won’t tell him!”

In the evening Lord de Winter accompanied the supper.

“Sir,” said Milady, “is your presence an indispensable accessory of my
captivity? Could you not spare me the increase of torture which your
visits cause me?”

“How, dear sister!” said Lord de Winter. “Did not you sentimentally
inform me with that pretty mouth of yours, so cruel to me today, that
you came to England solely for the pleasure of seeing me at your ease,
an enjoyment of which you told me you so sensibly felt the deprivation
that you had risked everything for it—seasickness, tempest, captivity?
Well, here I am; be satisfied. Besides, this time, my visit has a
motive.”

Milady trembled; she thought Felton had told all. Perhaps never in her
life had this woman, who had experienced so many opposite and powerful
emotions, felt her heart beat so violently.

She was seated. Lord de Winter took a chair, drew it toward her, and
sat down close beside her. Then taking a paper out of his pocket, he
unfolded it slowly.

“Here,” said he, “I want to show you the kind of passport which I have
drawn up, and which will serve you henceforward as the rule of order in
the life I consent to leave you.”

Then turning his eyes from Milady to the paper, he read: “‘Order to
conduct—’ The name is blank,” interrupted Lord de Winter. “If you have
any preference you can point it out to me; and if it be not within a
thousand leagues of London, attention will be paid to your wishes. I
will begin again, then:

“‘Order to conduct to—the person named Charlotte Backson, branded by
the justice of the kingdom of France, but liberated after chastisement.
She is to dwell in this place without ever going more than three
leagues from it. In case of any attempt to escape, the penalty of death
is to be applied. She will receive five shillings per day for lodging
and food’”.


“That order does not concern me,” replied Milady, coldly, “since it
bears another name than mine.”

“A name? Have you a name, then?”

“I bear that of your brother.”

“Ay, but you are mistaken. My brother is only your second husband; and
your first is still living. Tell me his name, and I will put it in the
place of the name of Charlotte Backson. No? You will not? You are
silent? Well, then you must be registered as Charlotte Backson.”

Milady remained silent; only this time it was no longer from
affectation, but from terror. She believed the order ready for
execution. She thought that Lord de Winter had hastened her departure;
she thought she was condemned to set off that very evening. Everything
in her mind was lost for an instant; when all at once she perceived
that no signature was attached to the order. The joy she felt at this
discovery was so great she could not conceal it.

“Yes, yes,” said Lord de Winter, who perceived what was passing in her
mind; “yes, you look for the signature, and you say to yourself: ‘All
is not lost, for that order is not signed. It is only shown to me to
terrify me, that’s all.’ You are mistaken. Tomorrow this order will be
sent to the Duke of Buckingham. The day after tomorrow it will return
signed by his hand and marked with his seal; and four-and-twenty hours
afterward I will answer for its being carried into execution. Adieu,
madame. That is all I had to say to you.”

“And I reply to you, sir, that this abuse of power, this exile under a
fictitious name, are infamous!”

“Would you like better to be hanged in your true name, Milady? You know
that the English laws are inexorable on the abuse of marriage. Speak
freely. Although my name, or rather that of my brother, would be mixed
up with the affair, I will risk the scandal of a public trial to make
myself certain of getting rid of you.”

Milady made no reply, but became as pale as a corpse.

“Oh, I see you prefer peregrination. That’s well madame; and there is
an old proverb that says, ‘Traveling trains youth.’ My faith! you are
not wrong after all, and life is sweet. That’s the reason why I take
such care you shall not deprive me of mine. There only remains, then,
the question of the five shillings to be settled. You think me rather
parsimonious, don’t you? That’s because I don’t care to leave you the
means of corrupting your jailers. Besides, you will always have your
charms left to seduce them with. Employ them, if your check with regard
to Felton has not disgusted you with attempts of that kind.”

“Felton has not told him,” said Milady to herself. “Nothing is lost,
then.”

“And now, madame, till I see you again! Tomorrow I will come and
announce to you the departure of my messenger.”

Lord de Winter rose, saluted her ironically, and went out.

Milady breathed again. She had still four days before her. Four days
would quite suffice to complete the seduction of Felton.

A terrible idea, however, rushed into her mind. She thought that Lord
de Winter would perhaps send Felton himself to get the order signed by
the Duke of Buckingham. In that case Felton would escape her—for in
order to secure success, the magic of a continuous seduction was
necessary. Nevertheless, as we have said, one circumstance reassured
her. Felton had not spoken.

As she would not appear to be agitated by the threats of Lord de
Winter, she placed herself at the table and ate.

Then, as she had done the evening before, she fell on her knees and
repeated her prayers aloud. As on the evening before, the soldier
stopped his march to listen to her.

Soon after she heard lighter steps than those of the sentinel, which
came from the end of the corridor and stopped before her door.

“It is he,” said she. And she began the same religious chant which had
so strongly excited Felton the evening before.

But although her voice—sweet, full, and sonorous—vibrated as
harmoniously and as affectingly as ever, the door remained shut. It
appeared however to Milady that in one of the furtive glances she
darted from time to time at the grating of the door she thought she saw
the ardent eyes of the young man through the narrow opening. But
whether this was reality or vision, he had this time sufficient
self-command not to enter.

However, a few instants after she had finished her religious song,
Milady thought she heard a profound sigh. Then the same steps she had
heard approach slowly withdrew, as if with regret.




Chapter LV.
CAPTIVITY: THE FOURTH DAY


The next day, when Felton entered Milady’s apartment he found her
standing, mounted upon a chair, holding in her hands a cord made by
means of torn cambric handkerchiefs, twisted into a kind of rope one
with another, and tied at the ends. At the noise Felton made in
entering, Milady leaped lightly to the ground, and tried to conceal
behind her the improvised cord she held in her hand.

The young man was more pale than usual, and his eyes, reddened by want
of sleep, denoted that he had passed a feverish night. Nevertheless,
his brow was armed with a severity more austere than ever.

He advanced slowly toward Milady, who had seated herself, and taking an
end of the murderous rope which by neglect, or perhaps by design, she
allowed to be seen, “What is this, madame?” he asked coldly.

“That? Nothing,” said Milady, smiling with that painful expression
which she knew so well how to give to her smile. “Ennui is the mortal
enemy of prisoners; I had ennui, and I amused myself with twisting that
rope.”

Felton turned his eyes toward the part of the wall of the apartment
before which he had found Milady standing in the armchair in which she
was now seated, and over her head he perceived a gilt-headed screw,
fixed in the wall for the purpose of hanging up clothes or weapons.

He started, and the prisoner saw that start—for though her eyes were
cast down, nothing escaped her.

“What were you doing on that armchair?” asked he.

“Of what consequence?” replied Milady.

“But,” replied Felton, “I wish to know.”

“Do not question me,” said the prisoner; “you know that we who are true
Christians are forbidden to lie.”

“Well, then,” said Felton, “I will tell you what you were doing, or
rather what you meant to do; you were going to complete the fatal
project you cherish in your mind. Remember, madame, if our God forbids
falsehood, he much more severely condemns suicide.”

“When God sees one of his creatures persecuted unjustly, placed between
suicide and dishonor, believe me, sir,” replied Milady, in a tone of
deep conviction, “God pardons suicide, for then suicide becomes
martyrdom.”

“You say either too much or too little; speak, madame. In the name of
heaven, explain yourself.”

“That I may relate my misfortunes for you to treat them as fables; that
I may tell you my projects for you to go and betray them to my
persecutor? No, sir. Besides, of what importance to you is the life or
death of a condemned wretch? You are only responsible for my body, is
it not so? And provided you produce a carcass that may be recognized as
mine, they will require no more of you; nay, perhaps you will even have
a double reward.”

“I, madame, I?” cried Felton. “You suppose that I would ever accept the
price of your life? Oh, you cannot believe what you say!”

“Let me act as I please, Felton, let me act as I please,” said Milady,
elated. “Every soldier must be ambitious, must he not? You are a
lieutenant? Well, you will follow me to the grave with the rank of
captain.”

“What have I, then, done to you,” said Felton, much agitated, “that you
should load me with such a responsibility before God and before men? In
a few days you will be away from this place; your life, madame, will
then no longer be under my care, and,” added he, with a sigh, “then you
can do what you will with it.”

“So,” cried Milady, as if she could not resist giving utterance to a
holy indignation, “you, a pious man, you who are called a just man, you
ask but one thing—and that is that you may not be inculpated, annoyed,
by my death!”

“It is my duty to watch over your life, madame, and I will watch.”

“But do you understand the mission you are fulfilling? Cruel enough, if
I am guilty; but what name can you give it, what name will the Lord
give it, if I am innocent?”

“I am a soldier, madame, and fulfill the orders I have received.”

“Do you believe, then, that at the day of the Last Judgment God will
separate blind executioners from iniquitous judges? You are not willing
that I should kill my body, and you make yourself the agent of him who
would kill my soul.”

“But I repeat it again to you,” replied Felton, in great emotion, “no
danger threatens you; I will answer for Lord de Winter as for myself.”

“Dunce,” cried Milady, “dunce! who dares to answer for another man,
when the wisest, when those most after God’s own heart, hesitate to
answer for themselves, and who ranges himself on the side of the
strongest and the most fortunate, to crush the weakest and the most
unfortunate.”

“Impossible, madame, impossible,” murmured Felton, who felt to the
bottom of his heart the justness of this argument. “A prisoner, you
will not recover your liberty through me; living, you will not lose
your life through me.”

“Yes,” cried Milady, “but I shall lose that which is much dearer to me
than life, I shall lose my honor, Felton; and it is you, you whom I
make responsible, before God and before men, for my shame and my
infamy.”

This time Felton, immovable as he was, or appeared to be, could not
resist the secret influence which had already taken possession of him.
To see this woman, so beautiful, fair as the brightest vision, to see
her by turns overcome with grief and threatening; to resist at once the
ascendancy of grief and beauty—it was too much for a visionary; it was
too much for a brain weakened by the ardent dreams of an ecstatic
faith; it was too much for a heart furrowed by the love of heaven that
burns, by the hatred of men that devours.

Milady saw the trouble. She felt by intuition the flame of the opposing
passions which burned with the blood in the veins of the young fanatic.
As a skillful general, seeing the enemy ready to surrender, marches
toward him with a cry of victory, she rose, beautiful as an antique
priestess, inspired like a Christian virgin, her arms extended, her
throat uncovered, her hair disheveled, holding with one hand her robe
modestly drawn over her breast, her look illumined by that fire which
had already created such disorder in the veins of the young Puritan,
and went toward him, crying out with a vehement air, and in her
melodious voice, to which on this occasion she communicated a terrible
energy:

“Let this victim to Baal be sent,
    To the lions the martyr be thrown!
Thy God shall teach thee to repent!
    From th’ abyss he’ll give ear to my moan.”


Felton stood before this strange apparition like one petrified.

“Who art thou? Who art thou?” cried he, clasping his hands. “Art thou a
messenger from God; art thou a minister from hell; art thou an angel or
a demon; callest thou thyself Eloa or Astarte?”

“Do you not know me, Felton? I am neither an angel nor a demon; I am a
daughter of earth, I am a sister of thy faith, that is all.”

“Yes, yes!” said Felton, “I doubted, but now I believe.”

“You believe, and still you are an accomplice of that child of Belial
who is called Lord de Winter! You believe, and yet you leave me in the
hands of mine enemies, of the enemy of England, of the enemy of God!
You believe, and yet you deliver me up to him who fills and defiles the
world with his heresies and debaucheries—to that infamous Sardanapalus
whom the blind call the Duke of Buckingham, and whom believers name
Antichrist!”

“I deliver you up to Buckingham? I? what mean you by that?”

“They have eyes,” cried Milady, “but they see not; ears have they, but
they hear not.”

“Yes, yes!” said Felton, passing his hands over his brow, covered with
sweat, as if to remove his last doubt. “Yes, I recognize the voice
which speaks to me in my dreams; yes, I recognize the features of the
angel who appears to me every night, crying to my soul, which cannot
sleep: ‘Strike, save England, save thyself—for thou wilt die without
having appeased God!’ Speak, speak!” cried Felton, “I can understand
you now.”

A flash of terrible joy, but rapid as thought, gleamed from the eyes of
Milady.

However fugitive this homicide flash, Felton saw it, and started as if
its light had revealed the abysses of this woman’s heart. He recalled,
all at once, the warnings of Lord de Winter, the seductions of Milady,
her first attempts after her arrival. He drew back a step, and hung
down his head, without, however, ceasing to look at her, as if,
fascinated by this strange creature, he could not detach his eyes from
her eyes.

Milady was not a woman to misunderstand the meaning of this hesitation.
Under her apparent emotions her icy coolness never abandoned her.
Before Felton replied, and before she should be forced to resume this
conversation, so difficult to be sustained in the same exalted tone,
she let her hands fall; and as if the weakness of the woman overpowered
the enthusiasm of the inspired fanatic, she said: “But no, it is not
for me to be the Judith to deliver Bethulia from this Holofernes. The
sword of the eternal is too heavy for my arm. Allow me, then, to avoid
dishonor by death; let me take refuge in martyrdom. I do not ask you
for liberty, as a guilty one would, nor for vengeance, as would a
pagan. Let me die; that is all. I supplicate you, I implore you on my
knees—let me die, and my last sigh shall be a blessing for my
preserver.”

Hearing that voice, so sweet and suppliant, seeing that look, so timid
and downcast, Felton reproached himself. By degrees the enchantress had
clothed herself with that magic adornment which she assumed and threw
aside at will; that is to say, beauty, meekness, and tears—and above
all, the irresistible attraction of mystical voluptuousness, the most
devouring of all voluptuousness.

“Alas!” said Felton, “I can do but one thing, which is to pity you if
you prove to me you are a victim! But Lord de Winter makes cruel
accusations against you. You are a Christian; you are my sister in
religion. I feel myself drawn toward you—I, who have never loved anyone
but my benefactor—I who have met with nothing but traitors and impious
men. But you, madame, so beautiful in reality, you, so pure in
appearance, must have committed great iniquities for Lord de Winter to
pursue you thus.”

“They have eyes,” repeated Milady, with an accent of indescribable
grief, “but they see not; ears have they, but they hear not.”

“But,” cried the young officer, “speak, then, speak!”

“Confide my shame to you,” cried Milady, with the blush of modesty upon
her countenance, “for often the crime of one becomes the shame of
another—confide my shame to you, a man, and I a woman? Oh,” continued
she, placing her hand modestly over her beautiful eyes, “never!
never!—I could not!”

“To me, to a brother?” said Felton.

Milady looked at him for some time with an expression which the young
man took for doubt, but which, however, was nothing but observation, or
rather the wish to fascinate.

Felton, in his turn a suppliant, clasped his hands.

“Well, then,” said Milady, “I confide in my brother; I will dare to—”

At this moment the steps of Lord de Winter were heard; but this time
the terrible brother-in-law of Milady did not content himself, as on
the preceding day, with passing before the door and going away again.
He paused, exchanged two words with the sentinel; then the door opened,
and he appeared.

During the exchange of these two words Felton drew back quickly, and
when Lord de Winter entered, he was several paces from the prisoner.

The baron entered slowly, sending a scrutinizing glance from Milady to
the young officer.

“You have been here a very long time, John,” said he. “Has this woman
been relating her crimes to you? In that case I can comprehend the
length of the conversation.”

Felton started; and Milady felt she was lost if she did not come to the
assistance of the disconcerted Puritan.

“Ah, you fear your prisoner should escape!” said she. “Well, ask your
worthy jailer what favor I this instant solicited of him.”

“You demanded a favor?” said the baron, suspiciously.

“Yes, my Lord,” replied the young man, confused.

“And what favor, pray?” asked Lord de Winter.

“A knife, which she would return to me through the grating of the door
a minute after she had received it,” replied Felton.

“There is someone, then, concealed here whose throat this amiable lady
is desirous of cutting,” said de Winter, in an ironical, contemptuous
tone.

“There is myself,” replied Milady.

“I have given you the choice between America and Tyburn,” replied Lord
de Winter. “Choose Tyburn, madame. Believe me, the cord is more certain
than the knife.”

Felton grew pale, and made a step forward, remembering that at the
moment he entered Milady had a rope in her hand.

“You are right,” said she, “I have often thought of it.” Then she added
in a low voice, “And I will think of it again.”

Felton felt a shudder run to the marrow of his bones; probably Lord de
Winter perceived this emotion.

“Mistrust yourself, John,” said he. “I have placed reliance upon you,
my friend. Beware! I have warned you! But be of good courage, my lad;
in three days we shall be delivered from this creature, and where I
shall send her she can harm nobody.”

“You hear him!” cried Milady, with vehemence, so that the baron might
believe she was addressing heaven, and that Felton might understand she
was addressing him.

Felton lowered his head and reflected.

The baron took the young officer by the arm, and turned his head over
his shoulder, so as not to lose sight of Milady till he was gone out.

“Well,” said the prisoner, when the door was shut, “I am not so far
advanced as I believed. De Winter has changed his usual stupidity into
a strange prudence. It is the desire of vengeance, and how desire molds
a man! As to Felton, he hesitates. Ah, he is not a man like that cursed
D’Artagnan. A Puritan only adores virgins, and he adores them by
clasping his hands. A Musketeer loves women, and he loves them by
clasping his arms round them.”

Milady waited, then, with much impatience, for she feared the day would
pass away without her seeing Felton again. At last, in an hour after
the scene we have just described, she heard someone speaking in a low
voice at the door. Presently the door opened, and she perceived Felton.

The young man advanced rapidly into the chamber, leaving the door open
behind him, and making a sign to Milady to be silent; his face was much
agitated.

“What do you want with me?” said she.

“Listen,” replied Felton, in a low voice. “I have just sent away the
sentinel that I might remain here without anybody knowing it, in order
to speak to you without being overheard. The baron has just related a
frightful story to me.”

Milady assumed her smile of a resigned victim, and shook her head.

“Either you are a demon,” continued Felton, “or the baron—my
benefactor, my father—is a monster. I have known you four days; I have
loved him four years. I therefore may hesitate between you. Be not
alarmed at what I say; I want to be convinced. Tonight, after twelve, I
will come and see you, and you shall convince me.”

“No, Felton, no, my brother,” said she; “the sacrifice is too great,
and I feel what it must cost you. No, I am lost; do not be lost with
me. My death will be much more eloquent than my life, and the silence
of the corpse will convince you much better than the words of the
prisoner.”

“Be silent, madame,” cried Felton, “and do not speak to me thus; I came
to entreat you to promise me upon your honor, to swear to me by what
you hold most sacred, that you will make no attempt upon your life.”

“I will not promise,” said Milady, “for no one has more respect for a
promise or an oath than I have; and if I make a promise I must keep
it.”

“Well,” said Felton, “only promise till you have seen me again. If,
when you have seen me again, you still persist—well, then you shall be
free, and I myself will give you the weapon you desire.”

“Well,” said Milady, “for you I will wait.”

“Swear.”

“I swear it, by our God. Are you satisfied?”

“Well,” said Felton, “till tonight.”

And he darted out of the room, shut the door, and waited in the
corridor, the soldier’s half-pike in his hand, and as if he had mounted
guard in his place.

The soldier returned, and Felton gave him back his weapon.

Then, through the grating to which she had drawn near, Milady saw the
young man make a sign with delirious fervor, and depart in an apparent
transport of joy.

As for her, she returned to her place with a smile of savage contempt
upon her lips, and repeated, blaspheming, that terrible name of God, by
whom she had just sworn without ever having learned to know Him.

“My God,” said she, “what a senseless fanatic! My God, it is I—I—and
this fellow who will help me to avenge myself.”
