Chapter LVI.
CAPTIVITY: THE FIFTH DAY


Milady had however achieved a half-triumph, and success doubled her
forces.

It was not difficult to conquer, as she had hitherto done, men prompt
to let themselves be seduced, and whom the gallant education of a court
led quickly into her net. Milady was handsome enough not to find much
resistance on the part of the flesh, and she was sufficiently skillful
to prevail over all the obstacles of the mind.

But this time she had to contend with an unpolished nature,
concentrated and insensible by force of austerity. Religion and its
observances had made Felton a man inaccessible to ordinary seductions.
There fermented in that sublimated brain plans so vast, projects so
tumultuous, that there remained no room for any capricious or material
love—that sentiment which is fed by leisure and grows with corruption.
Milady had, then, made a breach by her false virtue in the opinion of a
man horribly prejudiced against her, and by her beauty in the heart of
a man hitherto chaste and pure. In short, she had taken the measure of
motives hitherto unknown to herself, through this experiment, made upon
the most rebellious subject that nature and religion could submit to
her study.

Many a time, nevertheless, during the evening she despaired of fate and
of herself. She did not invoke God, we very well know, but she had
faith in the genius of evil—that immense sovereignty which reigns in
all the details of human life, and by which, as in the Arabian fable, a
single pomegranate seed is sufficient to reconstruct a ruined world.

Milady, being well prepared for the reception of Felton, was able to
erect her batteries for the next day. She knew she had only two days
left; that when once the order was signed by Buckingham—and Buckingham
would sign it the more readily from its bearing a false name, and he
could not, therefore, recognize the woman in question—once this order
was signed, we say, the baron would make her embark immediately, and
she knew very well that women condemned to exile employ arms much less
powerful in their seductions than the pretendedly virtuous woman whose
beauty is lighted by the sun of the world, whose style the voice of
fashion lauds, and whom a halo of aristocracy gilds with enchanting
splendors. To be a woman condemned to a painful and disgraceful
punishment is no impediment to beauty, but it is an obstacle to the
recovery of power. Like all persons of real genius, Milady knew what
suited her nature and her means. Poverty was repugnant to her;
degradation took away two-thirds of her greatness. Milady was only a
queen while among queens. The pleasure of satisfied pride was necessary
to her domination. To command inferior beings was rather a humiliation
than a pleasure for her.

She should certainly return from her exile—she did not doubt that a
single instant; but how long might this exile last? For an active,
ambitious nature, like that of Milady, days not spent in climbing are
inauspicious days. What word, then, can be found to describe the days
which they occupy in descending? To lose a year, two years, three
years, is to talk of an eternity; to return after the death or disgrace
of the cardinal, perhaps; to return when D’Artagnan and his friends,
happy and triumphant, should have received from the queen the reward
they had well acquired by the services they had rendered her—these were
devouring ideas that a woman like Milady could not endure. For the
rest, the storm which raged within her doubled her strength, and she
would have burst the walls of her prison if her body had been able to
take for a single instant the proportions of her mind.

Then that which spurred her on additionally in the midst of all this
was the remembrance of the cardinal. What must the mistrustful,
restless, suspicious cardinal think of her silence—the cardinal, not
merely her only support, her only prop, her only protector at present,
but still further, the principal instrument of her future fortune and
vengeance? She knew him; she knew that at her return from a fruitless
journey it would be in vain to tell him of her imprisonment, in vain to
enlarge upon the sufferings she had undergone. The cardinal would
reply, with the sarcastic calmness of the skeptic, strong at once by
power and genius, “You should not have allowed yourself to be taken.”

Then Milady collected all her energies, murmuring in the depths of her
soul the name of Felton—the only beam of light that penetrated to her
in the hell into which she had fallen; and like a serpent which folds
and unfolds its rings to ascertain its strength, she enveloped Felton
beforehand in the thousand meshes of her inventive imagination.

Time, however, passed away; the hours, one after another, seemed to
awaken the clock as they passed, and every blow of the brass hammer
resounded upon the heart of the prisoner. At nine o’clock, Lord de
Winter made his customary visit, examined the window and the bars,
sounded the floor and the walls, looked to the chimney and the doors,
without, during this long and minute examination, he or Milady
pronouncing a single word.

Doubtless both of them understood that the situation had become too
serious to lose time in useless words and aimless wrath.

“Well,” said the baron, on leaving her “you will not escape tonight!”

At ten o’clock Felton came and placed the sentinel. Milady recognized
his step. She was as well acquainted with it now as a mistress is with
that of the lover of her heart; and yet Milady at the same time
detested and despised this weak fanatic.

That was not the appointed hour. Felton did not enter.

Two hours after, as midnight sounded, the sentinel was relieved. This
time it _was_ the hour, and from this moment Milady waited with
impatience. The new sentinel commenced his walk in the corridor. At the
expiration of ten minutes Felton came.

Milady was all attention.

“Listen,” said the young man to the sentinel. “On no pretense leave the
door, for you know that last night my Lord punished a soldier for
having quit his post for an instant, although I, during his absence,
watched in his place.”

“Yes, I know it,” said the soldier.

“I recommend you therefore to keep the strictest watch. For my part I
am going to pay a second visit to this woman, who I fear entertains
sinister intentions upon her own life, and I have received orders to
watch her.”

“Good!” murmured Milady; “the austere Puritan lies.”

As to the soldier, he only smiled.

“Zounds, Lieutenant!” said he; “you are not unlucky in being charged
with such commissions, particularly if my Lord has authorized you to
look into her bed.”

Felton blushed. Under any other circumstances he would have reprimanded
the soldier for indulging in such pleasantry, but his conscience
murmured too loud for his mouth to dare speak.

“If I call, come,” said he. “If anyone comes, call me.”

“I will, Lieutenant,” said the soldier.

Felton entered Milady’s apartment. Milady arose.

“You are here!” said she.

“I promised to come,” said Felton, “and I have come.”

“You promised me something else.”

“What, my God!” said the young man, who in spite of his self-command
felt his knees tremble and the sweat start from his brow.

“You promised to bring a knife, and to leave it with me after our
interview.”

“Say no more of that, madame,” said Felton. “There is no situation,
however terrible it may be, which can authorize a creature of God to
inflict death upon himself. I have reflected, and I cannot, must not be
guilty of such a sin.”

“Ah, you have reflected!” said the prisoner, sitting down in her
armchair, with a smile of disdain; “and I also have reflected.”

“Upon what?”

“That I can have nothing to say to a man who does not keep his word.”

“Oh, my God!” murmured Felton.

“You may retire,” said Milady. “I will not talk.”

“Here is the knife,” said Felton, drawing from his pocket the weapon
which he had brought, according to his promise, but which he hesitated
to give to his prisoner.

“Let me see it,” said Milady.

“For what purpose?”

“Upon my honor, I will instantly return it to you. You shall place it
on that table, and you may remain between it and me.”

Felton offered the weapon to Milady, who examined the temper of it
attentively, and who tried the point on the tip of her finger.

“Well,” said she, returning the knife to the young officer, “this is
fine and good steel. You are a faithful friend, Felton.”

Felton took back the weapon, and laid it upon the table, as he had
agreed with the prisoner.

Milady followed him with her eyes, and made a gesture of satisfaction.

“Now,” said she, “listen to me.”

The request was needless. The young officer stood upright before her,
awaiting her words as if to devour them.

“Felton,” said Milady, with a solemnity full of melancholy, “imagine
that your sister, the daughter of your father, speaks to you. While yet
young, unfortunately handsome, I was dragged into a snare. I resisted.
Ambushes and violences multiplied around me, but I resisted. The
religion I serve, the God I adore, were blasphemed because I called
upon that religion and that God, but still I resisted. Then outrages
were heaped upon me, and as my soul was not subdued they wished to
defile my body forever. Finally—”

Milady stopped, and a bitter smile passed over her lips.

“Finally,” said Felton, “finally, what did they do?”

“At length, one evening my enemy resolved to paralyze the resistance he
could not conquer. One evening he mixed a powerful narcotic with my
water. Scarcely had I finished my repast, when I felt myself sink by
degrees into a strange torpor. Although I was without mistrust, a vague
fear seized me, and I tried to struggle against sleepiness. I arose. I
wished to run to the window and call for help, but my legs refused
their office. It appeared as if the ceiling sank upon my head and
crushed me with its weight. I stretched out my arms. I tried to speak.
I could only utter inarticulate sounds, and irresistible faintness came
over me. I supported myself by a chair, feeling that I was about to
fall, but this support was soon insufficient on account of my weak
arms. I fell upon one knee, then upon both. I tried to pray, but my
tongue was frozen. God doubtless neither heard nor saw me, and I sank
upon the floor a prey to a slumber which resembled death.

“Of all that passed in that sleep, or the time which glided away while
it lasted, I have no remembrance. The only thing I recollect is that I
awoke in bed in a round chamber, the furniture of which was sumptuous,
and into which light only penetrated by an opening in the ceiling. No
door gave entrance to the room. It might be called a magnificent
prison.

“It was a long time before I was able to make out what place I was in,
or to take account of the details I describe. My mind appeared to
strive in vain to shake off the heavy darkness of the sleep from which
I could not rouse myself. I had vague perceptions of space traversed,
of the rolling of a carriage, of a horrible dream in which my strength
had become exhausted; but all this was so dark and so indistinct in my
mind that these events seemed to belong to another life than mine, and
yet mixed with mine in fantastic duality.

“At times the state into which I had fallen appeared so strange that I
believed myself dreaming. I arose trembling. My clothes were near me on
a chair; I neither remembered having undressed myself nor going to bed.
Then by degrees the reality broke upon me, full of chaste terrors. I
was no longer in the house where I had dwelt. As well as I could judge
by the light of the sun, the day was already two-thirds gone. It was
the evening before when I had fallen asleep; my sleep, then, must have
lasted twenty-four hours! What had taken place during this long sleep?

“I dressed myself as quickly as possible; my slow and stiff motions all
attested that the effects of the narcotic were not yet entirely
dissipated. The chamber was evidently furnished for the reception of a
woman; and the most finished coquette could not have formed a wish, but
on casting her eyes about the apartment, she would have found that wish
accomplished.

“Certainly I was not the first captive that had been shut up in this
splendid prison; but you may easily comprehend, Felton, that the more
superb the prison, the greater was my terror.

“Yes, it was a prison, for I tried in vain to get out of it. I sounded
all the walls, in the hopes of discovering a door, but everywhere the
walls returned a full and flat sound.

“I made the tour of the room at least twenty times, in search of an
outlet of some kind; but there was none. I sank exhausted with fatigue
and terror into an armchair.

“Meantime, night came on rapidly, and with night my terrors increased.
I did not know but I had better remain where I was seated. It appeared
that I was surrounded with unknown dangers into which I was about to
fall at every instant. Although I had eaten nothing since the evening
before, my fears prevented my feeling hunger.

“No noise from without by which I could measure the time reached me; I
only supposed it must be seven or eight o’clock in the evening, for it
was in the month of October and it was quite dark.

“All at once the noise of a door, turning on its hinges, made me start.
A globe of fire appeared above the glazed opening of the ceiling,
casting a strong light into my chamber; and I perceived with terror
that a man was standing within a few paces of me.

“A table, with two covers, bearing a supper ready prepared, stood, as
if by magic, in the middle of the apartment.

“That man was he who had pursued me during a whole year, who had vowed
my dishonor, and who, by the first words that issued from his mouth,
gave me to understand he had accomplished it the preceding night.”

“Scoundrel!” murmured Felton.

“Oh, yes, scoundrel!” cried Milady, seeing the interest which the young
officer, whose soul seemed to hang on her lips, took in this strange
recital. “Oh, yes, scoundrel! He believed, having triumphed over me in
my sleep, that all was completed. He came, hoping that I would accept
my shame, as my shame was consummated; he came to offer his fortune in
exchange for my love.

“All that the heart of a woman could contain of haughty contempt and
disdainful words, I poured out upon this man. Doubtless he was
accustomed to such reproaches, for he listened to me calm and smiling,
with his arms crossed over his breast. Then, when he thought I had said
all, he advanced toward me; I sprang toward the table, I seized a
knife, I placed it to my breast.

“Take one step more,” said I, “and in addition to my dishonor, you
shall have my death to reproach yourself with.”

“There was, no doubt, in my look, my voice, my whole person, that
sincerity of gesture, of attitude, of accent, which carries conviction
to the most perverse minds, for he paused.

“‘Your death?’ said he; ‘oh, no, you are too charming a mistress to
allow me to consent to lose you thus, after I have had the happiness to
possess you only a single time. Adieu, my charmer; I will wait to pay
you my next visit till you are in a better humor.’

“At these words he blew a whistle; the globe of fire which lighted the
room reascended and disappeared. I found myself again in complete
darkness. The same noise of a door opening and shutting was repeated
the instant afterward; the flaming globe descended afresh, and I was
completely alone.

“This moment was frightful; if I had any doubts as to my misfortune,
these doubts had vanished in an overwhelming reality. I was in the
power of a man whom I not only detested, but despised—of a man capable
of anything, and who had already given me a fatal proof of what he was
able to do.”

“But who, then, was this man?” asked Felton.

“I passed the night on a chair, starting at the least noise, for toward
midnight the lamp went out, and I was again in darkness. But the night
passed away without any fresh attempt on the part of my persecutor. Day
came; the table had disappeared, only I had still the knife in my hand.

“This knife was my only hope.

“I was worn out with fatigue. Sleeplessness inflamed my eyes; I had not
dared to sleep a single instant. The light of day reassured me; I went
and threw myself on the bed, without parting with the emancipating
knife, which I concealed under my pillow.

“When I awoke, a fresh meal was served.

“This time, in spite of my terrors, in spite of my agony, I began to
feel a devouring hunger. It was forty-eight hours since I had taken any
nourishment. I ate some bread and some fruit; then, remembering the
narcotic mixed with the water I had drunk, I would not touch that which
was placed on the table, but filled my glass at a marble fountain fixed
in the wall over my dressing table.

“And yet, notwithstanding these precautions, I remained for some time
in a terrible agitation of mind. But my fears were this time
ill-founded; I passed the day without experiencing anything of the kind
I dreaded.

“I took the precaution to half empty the _carafe_, in order that my
suspicions might not be noticed.

“The evening came on, and with it darkness; but however profound was
this darkness, my eyes began to accustom themselves to it. I saw, amid
the shadows, the table sink through the floor; a quarter of an hour
later it reappeared, bearing my supper. In an instant, thanks to the
lamp, my chamber was once more lighted.

“I was determined to eat only such things as could not possibly have
anything soporific introduced into them. Two eggs and some fruit
composed my repast; then I drew another glass of water from my
protecting fountain, and drank it.

“At the first swallow, it appeared to me not to have the same taste as
in the morning. Suspicion instantly seized me. I paused, but I had
already drunk half a glass.

“I threw the rest away with horror, and waited, with the dew of fear
upon my brow.

“No doubt some invisible witness had seen me draw the water from that
fountain, and had taken advantage of my confidence in it, the better to
assure my ruin, so coolly resolved upon, so cruelly pursued.

“Half an hour had not passed when the same symptoms began to appear;
but as I had only drunk half a glass of the water, I contended longer,
and instead of falling entirely asleep, I sank into a state of
drowsiness which left me a perception of what was passing around me,
while depriving me of the strength either to defend myself or to fly.

“I dragged myself toward the bed, to seek the only defense I had
left—my saving knife; but I could not reach the bolster. I sank on my
knees, my hands clasped round one of the bedposts; then I felt that I
was lost.”

Felton became frightfully pale, and a convulsive tremor crept through
his whole body.

“And what was most frightful,” continued Milady, her voice altered, as
if she still experienced the same agony as at that awful minute, “was
that at this time I retained a consciousness of the danger that
threatened me; was that my soul, if I may say so, waked in my sleeping
body; was that I saw, that I heard. It is true that all was like a
dream, but it was not the less frightful.

“I saw the lamp ascend, and leave me in darkness; then I heard the
well-known creaking of the door although I had heard that door open but
twice.

“I felt instinctively that someone approached me; it is said that the
doomed wretch in the deserts of America thus feels the approach of the
serpent.

“I wished to make an effort; I attempted to cry out. By an incredible
effort of will I even raised myself up, but only to sink down again
immediately, and to fall into the arms of my persecutor.”

“Tell me who this man was!” cried the young officer.

Milady saw at a single glance all the painful feelings she inspired in
Felton by dwelling on every detail of her recital; but she would not
spare him a single pang. The more profoundly she wounded his heart, the
more certainly he would avenge her. She continued, then, as if she had
not heard his exclamation, or as if she thought the moment was not yet
come to reply to it.

“Only this time it was no longer an inert body, without feeling, that
the villain had to deal with. I have told you that without being able
to regain the complete exercise of my faculties, I retained the sense
of my danger. I struggled, then, with all my strength, and doubtless
opposed, weak as I was, a long resistance, for I heard him cry out,
‘These miserable Puritans! I knew very well that they tired out their
executioners, but I did not believe them so strong against their
lovers!’

“Alas! this desperate resistance could not last long. I felt my
strength fail, and this time it was not my sleep that enabled the
coward to prevail, but my swoon.”

Felton listened without uttering any word or sound, except an inward
expression of agony. The sweat streamed down his marble forehead, and
his hand, under his coat, tore his breast.

“My first impulse, on coming to myself, was to feel under my pillow for
the knife I had not been able to reach; if it had not been useful for
defense, it might at least serve for expiation.

“But on taking this knife, Felton, a terrible idea occurred to me. I
have sworn to tell you all, and I will tell you all. I have promised
you the truth; I will tell it, were it to destroy me.”

“The idea came into your mind to avenge yourself on this man, did it
not?” cried Felton.

“Yes,” said Milady. “The idea was not that of a Christian, I knew; but
without doubt, that eternal enemy of our souls, that lion roaring
constantly around us, breathed it into my mind. In short, what shall I
say to you, Felton?” continued Milady, in the tone of a woman accusing
herself of a crime. “This idea occurred to me, and did not leave me; it
is of this homicidal thought that I now bear the punishment.”

“Continue, continue!” said Felton; “I am eager to see you attain your
vengeance!”

“Oh, I resolved that it should take place as soon as possible. I had no
doubt he would return the following night. During the day I had nothing
to fear.

“When the hour of breakfast came, therefore, I did not hesitate to eat
and drink. I had determined to make believe sup, but to eat nothing. I
was forced, then, to combat the fast of the evening with the
nourishment of the morning.

“Only I concealed a glass of water, which remained after my breakfast,
thirst having been the chief of my sufferings when I remained
forty-eight hours without eating or drinking.

“The day passed away without having any other influence on me than to
strengthen the resolution I had formed; only I took care that my face
should not betray the thoughts of my heart, for I had no doubt I was
watched. Several times, even, I felt a smile on my lips. Felton, I dare
not tell you at what idea I smiled; you would hold me in horror—”

“Go on! go on!” said Felton; “you see plainly that I listen, and that I
am anxious to know the end.”

“Evening came; the ordinary events took place. During the darkness, as
before, my supper was brought. Then the lamp was lighted, and I sat
down to table. I only ate some fruit. I pretended to pour out water
from the jug, but I only drank that which I had saved in my glass. The
substitution was made so carefully that my spies, if I had any, could
have no suspicion of it.

“After supper I exhibited the same marks of languor as on the preceding
evening; but this time, as I yielded to fatigue, or as if I had become
familiarized with danger, I dragged myself toward my bed, let my robe
fall, and lay down.

“I found my knife where I had placed it, under my pillow, and while
feigning to sleep, my hand grasped the handle of it convulsively.

“Two hours passed away without anything fresh happening. Oh, my God!
who could have said so the evening before? I began to fear that he
would not come.

“At length I saw the lamp rise softly, and disappear in the depths of
the ceiling; my chamber was filled with darkness and obscurity, but I
made a strong effort to penetrate this darkness and obscurity.

“Nearly ten minutes passed; I heard no other noise but the beating of
my own heart. I implored heaven that he might come.

“At length I heard the well-known noise of the door, which opened and
shut; I heard, notwithstanding the thickness of the carpet, a step
which made the floor creak; I saw, notwithstanding the darkness, a
shadow which approached my bed.”

“Haste! haste!” said Felton; “do you not see that each of your words
burns me like molten lead?”

“Then,” continued Milady, “then I collected all my strength; I recalled
to my mind that the moment of vengeance, or rather, of justice, had
struck. I looked upon myself as another Judith; I gathered myself up,
my knife in my hand, and when I saw him near me, stretching out his
arms to find his victim, then, with the last cry of agony and despair,
I struck him in the middle of his breast.

“The miserable villain! He had foreseen all. His breast was covered
with a coat-of-mail; the knife was bent against it.

“‘Ah, ah!’ cried he, seizing my arm, and wresting from me the weapon
that had so badly served me, ‘you want to take my life, do you, my
pretty Puritan? But that’s more than dislike, that’s ingratitude! Come,
come, calm yourself, my sweet girl! I thought you had softened. I am
not one of those tyrants who detain women by force. You don’t love me.
With my usual fatuity I doubted it; now I am convinced. Tomorrow you
shall be free.’

“I had but one wish; that was that he should kill me.

“‘Beware!’ said I, ‘for my liberty is your dishonor.’

“‘Explain yourself, my pretty sibyl!’

“‘Yes; for as soon as I leave this place I will tell everything. I will
proclaim the violence you have used toward me. I will describe my
captivity. I will denounce this place of infamy. You are placed on
high, my Lord, but tremble! Above you there is the king; above the king
there is God!’

“However perfect master he was over himself, my persecutor allowed a
movement of anger to escape him. I could not see the expression of his
countenance, but I felt the arm tremble upon which my hand was placed.

“‘Then you shall not leave this place,’ said he.

“‘Very well,’ cried I, ‘then the place of my punishment will be that of
my tomb. I will die here, and you will see if a phantom that accuses is
not more terrible than a living being that threatens!’

“‘You shall have no weapon left in your power.’

“‘There is a weapon which despair has placed within the reach of every
creature who has the courage to use it. I will allow myself to die with
hunger.’

“‘Come,’ said the wretch, ‘is not peace much better than such a war as
that? I will restore you to liberty this moment; I will proclaim you a
piece of immaculate virtue; I will name you the Lucretia of England.’

“‘And I will say that you are the Sextus. I will denounce you before
men, as I have denounced you before God; and if it be necessary that,
like Lucretia, I should sign my accusation with my blood, I will sign
it.’

“‘Ah!’ said my enemy, in a jeering tone, ‘that’s quite another thing.
My faith! everything considered, you are very well off here. You shall
want for nothing, and if you let yourself die of hunger that will be
your own fault.’

“At these words he retired. I heard the door open and shut, and I
remained overwhelmed, less, I confess it, by my grief than by the
mortification of not having avenged myself.

“He kept his word. All the day, all the next night passed away without
my seeing him again. But I also kept my word with him, and I neither
ate nor drank. I was, as I told him, resolved to die of hunger.

“I passed the day and the night in prayer, for I hoped that God would
pardon me my suicide.

“The second night the door opened; I was lying on the floor, for my
strength began to abandon me.

“At the noise I raised myself up on one hand.

“‘Well,’ said a voice which vibrated in too terrible a manner in my ear
not to be recognized, ‘well! Are we softened a little? Will we not pay
for our liberty with a single promise of silence? Come, I am a good
sort of a prince,’ added he, ‘and although I like not Puritans I do
them justice; and it is the same with Puritanesses, when they are
pretty. Come, take a little oath for me on the cross; I won’t ask
anything more of you.’

“‘On the cross,’ cried I, rising, for at that abhorred voice I had
recovered all my strength, ‘on the cross I swear that no promise, no
menace, no force, no torture, shall close my mouth! On the cross I
swear to denounce you everywhere as a murderer, as a thief of honor, as
a base coward! On the cross I swear, if I ever leave this place, to
call down vengeance upon you from the whole human race!’

“‘Beware!’ said the voice, in a threatening accent that I had never yet
heard. ‘I have an extraordinary means which I will not employ but in
the last extremity to close your mouth, or at least to prevent anyone
from believing a word you may utter.’

“I mustered all my strength to reply to him with a burst of laughter.

“He saw that it was a merciless war between us—a war to the death.

“‘Listen!’ said he. ‘I give you the rest of tonight and all day
tomorrow. Reflect: promise to be silent, and riches, consideration,
even honor, shall surround you; threaten to speak, and I will condemn
you to infamy.’

“‘You?’ cried I. ‘You?’

“‘To interminable, ineffaceable infamy!’

“‘You?’ repeated I. Oh, I declare to you, Felton, I thought him mad!

“‘Yes, yes, I!’ replied he.

“‘Oh, leave me!’ said I. ‘Begone, if you do not desire to see me dash
my head against that wall before your eyes!’

“‘Very well, it is your own doing. Till tomorrow evening, then!’

“‘Till tomorrow evening, then!’ replied I, allowing myself to fall, and
biting the carpet with rage.”

Felton leaned for support upon a piece of furniture; and Milady saw,
with the joy of a demon, that his strength would fail him perhaps
before the end of her recital.




Chapter LVII.
MEANS FOR CLASSICAL TRAGEDY


After a moment of silence employed by Milady in observing the young man
who listened to her, Milady continued her recital.

“It was nearly three days since I had eaten or drunk anything. I
suffered frightful torments. At times there passed before me clouds
which pressed my brow, which veiled my eyes; this was delirium.

“When the evening came I was so weak that every time I fainted I
thanked God, for I thought I was about to die.

“In the midst of one of these swoons I heard the door open. Terror
recalled me to myself.

“He entered the apartment followed by a man in a mask. He was masked
likewise; but I knew his step, I knew his voice, I knew him by that
imposing bearing which hell has bestowed upon his person for the curse
of humanity.

“‘Well,’ said he to me, ‘have you made your mind up to take the oath I
requested of you?’

“‘You have said Puritans have but one word. Mine you have heard, and
that is to pursue you—on earth to the tribunal of men, in heaven to the
tribunal of God.’

“‘You persist, then?’

“‘I swear it before the God who hears me. I will take the whole world
as a witness of your crime, and that until I have found an avenger.’

“‘You are a prostitute,’ said he, in a voice of thunder, ‘and you shall
undergo the punishment of prostitutes! Branded in the eyes of the world
you invoke, try to prove to that world that you are neither guilty nor
mad!’

“Then, addressing the man who accompanied him, ‘Executioner,’ said he,
‘do your duty.’”

“Oh, his name, his name!” cried Felton. “His name, tell it me!”

“Then in spite of my cries, in spite of my resistance—for I began to
comprehend that there was a question of something worse than death—the
executioner seized me, threw me on the floor, fastened me with his
bonds, and suffocated by sobs, almost without sense, invoking God, who
did not listen to me, I uttered all at once a frightful cry of pain and
shame. A burning fire, a red-hot iron, the iron of the executioner, was
imprinted on my shoulder.”

Felton uttered a groan.

“Here,” said Milady, rising with the majesty of a queen, “here, Felton,
behold the new martyrdom invented for a pure young girl, the victim of
the brutality of a villain. Learn to know the heart of men, and
henceforth make yourself less easily the instrument of their unjust
vengeance.”

Milady, with a rapid gesture, opened her robe, tore the cambric that
covered her bosom, and red with feigned anger and simulated shame,
showed the young man the ineffaceable impression which dishonored that
beautiful shoulder.

“But,” cried Felton, “that is a _fleur-de-lis_ which I see there.”

“And therein consisted the infamy,” replied Milady. “The brand of
England!—it would be necessary to prove what tribunal had imposed it on
me, and I could have made a public appeal to all the tribunals of the
kingdom; but the brand of France!—oh, by that, by _that_ I was branded
indeed!”

This was too much for Felton.

Pale, motionless, overwhelmed by this frightful revelation, dazzled by
the superhuman beauty of this woman who unveiled herself before him
with an immodesty which appeared to him sublime, he ended by falling on
his knees before her as the early Christians did before those pure and
holy martyrs whom the persecution of the emperors gave up in the circus
to the sanguinary sensuality of the populace. The brand disappeared;
the beauty alone remained.

“Pardon! Pardon!” cried Felton, “oh, pardon!”

Milady read in his eyes _love! love!_

“Pardon for what?” asked she.

“Pardon me for having joined with your persecutors.”

Milady held out her hand to him.

“So beautiful! so young!” cried Felton, covering that hand with his
kisses.

Milady let one of those looks fall upon him which make a slave of a
king.

Felton was a Puritan; he abandoned the hand of this woman to kiss her
feet.

He no longer loved her; he adored her.

When this crisis was past, when Milady appeared to have resumed her
self-possession, which she had never lost; when Felton had seen her
recover with the veil of chastity those treasures of love which were
only concealed from him to make him desire them the more ardently, he
said, “Ah, now! I have only one thing to ask of you; that is, the name
of your true executioner. For to me there is but one; the other was an
instrument, that was all.”

“What, brother!” cried Milady, “must I name him again? Have you not yet
divined who he is?”

“What?” cried Felton, “he—again he—always he? What—the truly guilty?”

“The truly guilty,” said Milady, “is the ravager of England, the
persecutor of true believers, the base ravisher of the honor of so many
women—he who, to satisfy a caprice of his corrupt heart, is about to
make England shed so much blood, who protects the Protestants today and
will betray them tomorrow—”

“Buckingham! It is, then, Buckingham!” cried Felton, in a high state of
excitement.

Milady concealed her face in her hands, as if she could not endure the
shame which this name recalled to her.

“Buckingham, the executioner of this angelic creature!” cried Felton.
“And thou hast not hurled thy thunder at him, my God! And thou hast
left him noble, honored, powerful, for the ruin of us all!”

“God abandons him who abandons himself,” said Milady.

“But he will draw upon his head the punishment reserved for the
damned!” said Felton, with increasing exultation. “He wills that human
vengeance should precede celestial justice.”

“Men fear him and spare him.”

“I,” said Felton, “I do not fear him, nor will I spare him.”

The soul of Milady was bathed in an infernal joy.

“But how can Lord de Winter, my protector, my father,” asked Felton,
“possibly be mixed up with all this?”

“Listen, Felton,” resumed Milady, “for by the side of base and
contemptible men there are often found great and generous natures. I
had an affianced husband, a man whom I loved, and who loved me—a heart
like yours, Felton, a man like you. I went to him and told him all; he
knew me, that man did, and did not doubt an instant. He was a nobleman,
a man equal to Buckingham in every respect. He said nothing; he only
girded on his sword, wrapped himself in his cloak, and went straight to
Buckingham Palace.

“Yes, yes,” said Felton; “I understand how he would act. But with such
men it is not the sword that should be employed; it is the poniard.”

“Buckingham had left England the day before, sent as ambassador to
Spain, to demand the hand of the Infanta for King Charles I., who was
then only Prince of Wales. My affianced husband returned.

“‘Hear me,’ said he; ‘this man has gone, and for the moment has
consequently escaped my vengeance; but let us be united, as we were to
have been, and then leave it to Lord de Winter to maintain his own
honor and that of his wife.’”

“Lord de Winter!” cried Felton.

“Yes,” said Milady, “Lord de Winter; and now you can understand it all,
can you not? Buckingham remained nearly a year absent. A week before
his return Lord de Winter died, leaving me his sole heir. Whence came
the blow? God who knows all, knows without doubt; but as for me, I
accuse nobody.”

“Oh, what an abyss; what an abyss!” cried Felton.

“Lord de Winter died without revealing anything to his brother. The
terrible secret was to be concealed till it burst, like a clap of
thunder, over the head of the guilty. Your protector had seen with pain
this marriage of his elder brother with a portionless girl. I was
sensible that I could look for no support from a man disappointed in
his hopes of an inheritance. I went to France, with a determination to
remain there for the rest of my life. But all my fortune is in England.
Communication being closed by the war, I was in want of everything. I
was then obliged to come back again. Six days ago, I landed at
Portsmouth.”

“Well?” said Felton.

“Well; Buckingham heard by some means, no doubt, of my return. He spoke
of me to Lord de Winter, already prejudiced against me, and told him
that his sister-in-law was a prostitute, a branded woman. The noble and
pure voice of my husband was no longer here to defend me. Lord de
Winter believed all that was told him with so much the more ease that
it was his interest to believe it. He caused me to be arrested, had me
conducted hither, and placed me under your guard. You know the rest.
The day after tomorrow he banishes me, he transports me; the day after
tomorrow he exiles me among the infamous. Oh, the train is well laid;
the plot is clever. My honor will not survive it! You see, then,
Felton, I can do nothing but die. Felton, give me that knife!”

And at these words, as if all her strength was exhausted, Milady sank,
weak and languishing, into the arms of the young officer, who,
intoxicated with love, anger, and voluptuous sensations hitherto
unknown, received her with transport, pressed her against his heart,
all trembling at the breath from that charming mouth, bewildered by the
contact with that palpitating bosom.

“No, no,” said he. “No, you shall live honored and pure; you shall live
to triumph over your enemies.”

Milady put him from her slowly with her hand, while drawing him nearer
with her look; but Felton, in his turn, embraced her more closely,
imploring her like a divinity.

“Oh, death, death!” said she, lowering her voice and her eyelids, “oh,
death, rather than shame! Felton, my brother, my friend, I conjure
you!”

“No,” cried Felton, “no; you shall live and you shall be avenged.”

“Felton, I bring misfortune to all who surround me! Felton, abandon me!
Felton, let me die!”

“Well, then, we will live and die together!” cried he, pressing his
lips to those of the prisoner.

Several strokes resounded on the door; this time Milady really pushed
him away from her.

“Hark,” said she, “we have been overheard! Someone is coming! All is
over! We are lost!”

“No,” said Felton; it is only the sentinel warning me that they are
about to change the guard.”

“Then run to the door, and open it yourself.”

Felton obeyed; this woman was now his whole thought, his whole soul.

He found himself face to face with a sergeant commanding a
watch-patrol.

“Well, what is the matter?” asked the young lieutenant.

“You told me to open the door if I heard anyone cry out,” said the
soldier; “but you forgot to leave me the key. I heard you cry out,
without understanding what you said. I tried to open the door, but it
was locked inside; then I called the sergeant.”

“And here I am,” said the sergeant.

Felton, quite bewildered, almost mad, stood speechless.

Milady plainly perceived that it was now her turn to take part in the
scene. She ran to the table, and seizing the knife which Felton had
laid down, exclaimed, “And by what right will you prevent me from
dying?”

“Great God!” exclaimed Felton, on seeing the knife glitter in her hand.

At that moment a burst of ironical laughter resounded through the
corridor. The baron, attracted by the noise, in his chamber gown, his
sword under his arm, stood in the doorway.

“Ah,” said he, “here we are, at the last act of the tragedy. You see,
Felton, the drama has gone through all the phases I named; but be easy,
no blood will flow.”

Milady perceived that all was lost unless she gave Felton an immediate
and terrible proof of her courage.

“You are mistaken, my Lord, blood will flow; and may that blood fall
back on those who cause it to flow!”

Felton uttered a cry, and rushed toward her. He was too late; Milady
had stabbed herself.

But the knife had fortunately, we ought to say skillfully, come in
contact with the steel busk, which at that period, like a cuirass,
defended the chests of women. It had glided down it, tearing the robe,
and had penetrated slantingly between the flesh and the ribs. Milady’s
robe was not the less stained with blood in a second.

Milady fell down, and seemed to be in a swoon.

Felton snatched away the knife.

“See, my Lord,” said he, in a deep, gloomy tone, “here is a woman who
was under my guard, and who has killed herself!”

“Be at ease, Felton,” said Lord de Winter. “She is not dead; demons do
not die so easily. Be tranquil, and go wait for me in my chamber.”

“But, my Lord—”

“Go, sir, I command you!”

At this injunction from his superior, Felton obeyed; but in going out,
he put the knife into his bosom.

As to Lord de Winter, he contented himself with calling the woman who
waited on Milady, and when she was come, he recommended the prisoner,
who was still fainting, to her care, and left them alone.

Meanwhile, all things considered and notwithstanding his suspicions, as
the wound might be serious, he immediately sent off a mounted man to
find a physician.




Chapter LVIII.
ESCAPE


As Lord de Winter had thought, Milady’s wound was not dangerous. So
soon as she was left alone with the woman whom the baron had summoned
to her assistance she opened her eyes.

It was, however, necessary to affect weakness and pain—not a very
difficult task for so finished an actress as Milady. Thus the poor
woman was completely the dupe of the prisoner, whom, notwithstanding
her hints, she persisted in watching all night.

But the presence of this woman did not prevent Milady from thinking.

There was no longer a doubt that Felton was convinced; Felton was hers.
If an angel appeared to that young man as an accuser of Milady, he
would take him, in the mental disposition in which he now found
himself, for a messenger sent by the devil.

Milady smiled at this thought, for Felton was now her only hope—her
only means of safety.

But Lord de Winter might suspect him; Felton himself might now be
watched!

Toward four o’clock in the morning the doctor arrived; but since the
time Milady stabbed herself, however short, the wound had closed. The
doctor could therefore measure neither the direction nor the depth of
it; he only satisfied himself by Milady’s pulse that the case was not
serious.

In the morning Milady, under the pretext that she had not slept well in
the night and wanted rest, sent away the woman who attended her.

She had one hope, which was that Felton would appear at the breakfast
hour; but Felton did not come.

Were her fears realized? Was Felton, suspected by the baron, about to
fail her at the decisive moment? She had only one day left. Lord de
Winter had announced her embarkation for the twenty-third, and it was
now the morning of the twenty-second.

Nevertheless she still waited patiently till the hour for dinner.

Although she had eaten nothing in the morning, the dinner was brought
in at its usual time. Milady then perceived, with terror, that the
uniform of the soldiers who guarded her was changed.

Then she ventured to ask what had become of Felton.

She was told that he had left the castle an hour before on horseback.
She inquired if the baron was still at the castle. The soldier replied
that he was, and that he had given orders to be informed if the
prisoner wished to speak to him.

Milady replied that she was too weak at present, and that her only
desire was to be left alone.

The soldier went out, leaving the dinner served.

Felton was sent away. The marines were removed. Felton was then
mistrusted.

This was the last blow to the prisoner.

Left alone, she arose. The bed, which she had kept from prudence and
that they might believe her seriously wounded, burned her like a bed of
fire. She cast a glance at the door; the baron had had a plank nailed
over the grating. He no doubt feared that by this opening she might
still by some diabolical means corrupt her guards.

Milady smiled with joy. She was free now to give way to her transports
without being observed. She traversed her chamber with the excitement
of a furious maniac or of a tigress shut up in an iron cage. _Certes_,
if the knife had been left in her power, she would now have thought,
not of killing herself, but of killing the baron.

At six o’clock Lord de Winter came in. He was armed at all points. This
man, in whom Milady till that time had only seen a very simple
gentleman, had become an admirable jailer. He appeared to foresee all,
to divine all, to anticipate all.

A single look at Milady apprised him of all that was passing in her
mind.

“Ay!” said he, “I see; but you shall not kill me today. You have no
longer a weapon; and besides, I am on my guard. You had begun to
pervert my poor Felton. He was yielding to your infernal influence; but
I will save him. He will never see you again; all is over. Get your
clothes together. Tomorrow you will go. I had fixed the embarkation for
the twenty-fourth; but I have reflected that the more promptly the
affair takes place the more sure it will be. Tomorrow, by twelve
o’clock, I shall have the order for your exile, signed, _Buckingham_.
If you speak a single word to anyone before going aboard ship, my
sergeant will blow your brains out. He has orders to do so. If when on
the ship you speak a single word to anyone before the captain permits
you, the captain will have you thrown into the sea. That is agreed
upon.

“_Au revoir_, then; that is all I have to say today. Tomorrow I will
see you again, to take my leave.” With these words the baron went out.
Milady had listened to all this menacing tirade with a smile of disdain
on her lips, but rage in her heart.

Supper was served. Milady felt that she stood in need of all her
strength. She did not know what might take place during this night
which approached so menacingly—for large masses of cloud rolled over
the face of the sky, and distant lightning announced a storm.

The storm broke about ten o’clock. Milady felt a consolation in seeing
nature partake of the disorder of her heart. The thunder growled in the
air like the passion and anger in her thoughts. It appeared to her that
the blast as it swept along disheveled her brow, as it bowed the
branches of the trees and bore away their leaves. She howled as the
hurricane howled; and her voice was lost in the great voice of nature,
which also seemed to groan with despair.

All at once she heard a tap at her window, and by the help of a flash
of lightning she saw the face of a man appear behind the bars.

She ran to the window and opened it.

“Felton!” cried she. “I am saved.”

“Yes,” said Felton; “but silence, silence! I must have time to file
through these bars. Only take care that I am not seen through the
wicket.”

“Oh, it is a proof that the Lord is on our side, Felton,” replied
Milady. “They have closed up the grating with a board.”

“That is well; God has made them senseless,” said Felton.

“But what must I do?” asked Milady.

“Nothing, nothing, only shut the window. Go to bed, or at least lie
down in your clothes. As soon as I have done I will knock on one of the
panes of glass. But will you be able to follow me?”

“Oh, yes!”

“Your wound?”

“Gives me pain, but will not prevent my walking.”

“Be ready, then, at the first signal.”

Milady shut the window, extinguished the lamp, and went, as Felton had
desired her, to lie down on the bed. Amid the moaning of the storm she
heard the grinding of the file upon the bars, and by the light of every
flash she perceived the shadow of Felton through the panes.

She passed an hour without breathing, panting, with a cold sweat upon
her brow, and her heart oppressed by frightful agony at every movement
she heard in the corridor.

There are hours which last a year.

At the expiration of an hour, Felton tapped again.

Milady sprang out of bed and opened the window. Two bars removed formed
an opening for a man to pass through.

“Are you ready?” asked Felton.

“Yes. Must I take anything with me?”

“Money, if you have any.”

“Yes; fortunately they have left me all I had.”

“So much the better, for I have expended all mine in chartering a
vessel.”

“Here!” said Milady, placing a bag full of louis in Felton’s hands.

Felton took the bag and threw it to the foot of the wall.

“Now,” said he, “will you come?”

“I am ready.”

Milady mounted upon a chair and passed the upper part of her body
through the window. She saw the young officer suspended over the abyss
by a ladder of ropes. For the first time an emotion of terror reminded
her that she was a woman.

The dark space frightened her.

“I expected this,” said Felton.

“It’s nothing, it’s nothing!” said Milady. “I will descend with my eyes
shut.”

“Have you confidence in me?” said Felton.

“You ask that?”

“Put your two hands together. Cross them; that’s right!”

Felton tied her two wrists together with his handkerchief, and then
with a cord over the handkerchief.

“What are you doing?” asked Milady, with surprise.

“Pass your arms around my neck, and fear nothing.”

“But I shall make you lose your balance, and we shall both be dashed to
pieces.”

“Don’t be afraid. I am a sailor.”

Not a second was to be lost. Milady passed her two arms round Felton’s
neck, and let herself slip out of the window. Felton began to descend
the ladder slowly, step by step. Despite the weight of two bodies, the
blast of the hurricane shook them in the air.

All at once Felton stopped.

“What is the matter?” asked Milady.

“Silence,” said Felton, “I hear footsteps.”

“We are discovered!”

There was a silence of several seconds.

“No,” said Felton, “it is nothing.”

“But what, then, is the noise?”

“That of the patrol going their rounds.”

“Where is their road?”

“Just under us.”

“They will discover us!”

“No, if it does not lighten.”

“But they will run against the bottom of the ladder.”

“Fortunately it is too short by six feet.”

“Here they are! My God!”

“Silence!”

Both remained suspended, motionless and breathless, within twenty paces
of the ground, while the patrol passed beneath them laughing and
talking. This was a terrible moment for the fugitives.

The patrol passed. The noise of their retreating footsteps and the
murmur of their voices soon died away.

“Now,” said Felton, “we are safe.”

Milady breathed a deep sigh and fainted.

Felton continued to descend. Near the bottom of the ladder, when he
found no more support for his feet, he clung with his hands; at length,
arrived at the last step, he let himself hang by the strength of his
wrists, and touched the ground. He stooped down, picked up the bag of
money, and placed it between his teeth. Then he took Milady in his
arms, and set off briskly in the direction opposite to that which the
patrol had taken. He soon left the pathway of the patrol, descended
across the rocks, and when arrived on the edge of the sea, whistled.

A similar signal replied to him; and five minutes after, a boat
appeared, rowed by four men.

The boat approached as near as it could to the shore; but there was not
depth enough of water for it to touch land. Felton walked into the sea
up to his middle, being unwilling to trust his precious burden to
anybody.

Fortunately the storm began to subside, but still the sea was
disturbed. The little boat bounded over the waves like a nut-shell.

“To the sloop,” said Felton, “and row quickly.”

The four men bent to their oars, but the sea was too high to let them
get much hold of it.

However, they left the castle behind; that was the principal thing. The
night was extremely dark. It was almost impossible to see the shore
from the boat; they would therefore be less likely to see the boat from
the shore.

A black point floated on the sea. That was the sloop. While the boat
was advancing with all the speed its four rowers could give it, Felton
untied the cord and then the handkerchief which bound Milady’s hands
together. When her hands were loosed he took some sea water and
sprinkled it over her face.

Milady breathed a sigh, and opened her eyes.

“Where am I?” said she.

“Saved!” replied the young officer.

“Oh, saved, saved!” cried she. “Yes, there is the sky; here is the sea!
The air I breathe is the air of liberty! Ah, thanks, Felton, thanks!”

The young man pressed her to his heart.

“But what is the matter with my hands!” asked Milady; “it seems as if
my wrists had been crushed in a vice.”

Milady held out her arms; her wrists were bruised.

“Alas!” said Felton, looking at those beautiful hands, and shaking his
head sorrowfully.

“Oh, it’s nothing, nothing!” cried Milady. “I remember now.”

Milady looked around her, as if in search of something.

“It is there,” said Felton, touching the bag of money with his foot.

They drew near to the sloop. A sailor on watch hailed the boat; the
boat replied.

“What vessel is that?” asked Milady.

“The one I have hired for you.”

“Where will it take me?”

“Where you please, after you have put me on shore at Portsmouth.”

“What are you going to do at Portsmouth?” asked Milady.

“Accomplish the orders of Lord de Winter,” said Felton, with a gloomy
smile.

“What orders?” asked Milady.

“You do not understand?” asked Felton.

“No; explain yourself, I beg.”

“As he mistrusted me, he determined to guard you himself, and sent me
in his place to get Buckingham to sign the order for your
transportation.”

“But if he mistrusted you, how could he confide such an order to you?”

“How could I know what I was the bearer of?”

“That’s true! And you are going to Portsmouth?”

“I have no time to lose. Tomorrow is the twenty-third, and Buckingham
sets sail tomorrow with his fleet.”

“He sets sail tomorrow! Where for?”

“For La Rochelle.”

“He need not sail!” cried Milady, forgetting her usual presence of
mind.

“Be satisfied,” replied Felton; “he will not sail.”

Milady started with joy. She could read to the depths of the heart of
this young man; the death of Buckingham was written there at full
length.

“Felton,” cried she, “you are as great as Judas Maccabeus! If you die,
I will die with you; that is all I can say to you.”

“Silence!” cried Felton; “we are here.”

In fact, they touched the sloop.

Felton mounted the ladder first, and gave his hand to Milady, while the
sailors supported her, for the sea was still much agitated.

An instant after they were on the deck.

“Captain,” said Felton, “this is the person of whom I spoke to you, and
whom you must convey safe and sound to France.”

“For a thousand pistoles,” said the captain.

“I have paid you five hundred of them.”

“That’s correct,” said the captain.

“And here are the other five hundred,” replied Milady, placing her hand
upon the bag of gold.

“No,” said the captain, “I make but one bargain; and I have agreed with
this young man that the other five hundred shall not be due to me till
we arrive at Boulogne.”

“And shall we arrive there?”

“Safe and sound, as true as my name’s Jack Butler.”

“Well,” said Milady, “if you keep your word, instead of five hundred, I
will give you a thousand pistoles.”

“Hurrah for you, then, my beautiful lady,” cried the captain; “and may
God often send me such passengers as your Ladyship!”

“Meanwhile,” said Felton, “convey me to the little bay of—; you know it
was agreed you should put in there.”

The captain replied by ordering the necessary maneuvers, and toward
seven o’clock in the morning the little vessel cast anchor in the bay
that had been named.

During this passage, Felton related everything to Milady—how, instead
of going to London, he had chartered the little vessel; how he had
returned; how he had scaled the wall by fastening cramps in the
interstices of the stones, as he ascended, to give him foothold; and
how, when he had reached the bars, he fastened his ladder. Milady knew
the rest.

On her side, Milady tried to encourage Felton in his project; but at
the first words which issued from her mouth, she plainly saw that the
young fanatic stood more in need of being moderated than urged.

It was agreed that Milady should wait for Felton till ten o’clock; if
he did not return by ten o’clock she was to sail.

In that case, and supposing he was at liberty, he was to rejoin her in
France, at the convent of the Carmelites at Béthune.




Chapter LIX.
WHAT TOOK PLACE AT PORTSMOUTH
AUGUST 23, 1628


Felton took leave of Milady as a brother about to go for a mere walk
takes leave of his sister, kissing her hand.

His whole body appeared in its ordinary state of calmness, only an
unusual fire beamed from his eyes, like the effects of a fever; his
brow was more pale than it generally was; his teeth were clenched, and
his speech had a short dry accent which indicated that something dark
was at work within him.

As long as he remained in the boat which conveyed him to land, he kept
his face toward Milady, who, standing on the deck, followed him with
her eyes. Both were free from the fear of pursuit; nobody ever came
into Milady’s apartment before nine o’clock, and it would require three
hours to go from the castle to London.

Felton jumped onshore, climbed the little ascent which led to the top
of the cliff, saluted Milady a last time, and took his course toward
the city.

At the end of a hundred paces, the ground began to decline, and he
could only see the mast of the sloop.

He immediately ran in the direction of Portsmouth, which he saw at
nearly half a league before him, standing out in the haze of the
morning, with its houses and towers.

Beyond Portsmouth the sea was covered with vessels whose masts, like a
forest of poplars despoiled by the winter, bent with each breath of the
wind.

Felton, in his rapid walk, reviewed in his mind all the accusations
against the favorite of James I. and Charles I., furnished by two years
of premature meditation and a long sojourn among the Puritans.

When he compared the public crimes of this minister—startling crimes,
European crimes, if so we may say—with the private and unknown crimes
with which Milady had charged him, Felton found that the more culpable
of the two men which formed the character of Buckingham was the one of
whom the public knew not the life. This was because his love, so
strange, so new, and so ardent, made him view the infamous and
imaginary accusations of Milady de Winter as, through a magnifying
glass, one views as frightful monsters atoms in reality imperceptible
by the side of an ant.

The rapidity of his walk heated his blood still more; the idea that he
left behind him, exposed to a frightful vengeance, the woman he loved,
or rather whom he adored as a saint, the emotion he had experienced,
present fatigue—all together exalted his mind above human feeling.

He entered Portsmouth about eight o’clock in the morning. The whole
population was on foot; drums were beating in the streets and in the
port; the troops about to embark were marching toward the sea.

Felton arrived at the palace of the Admiralty, covered with dust, and
streaming with perspiration. His countenance, usually so pale, was
purple with heat and passion. The sentinel wanted to repulse him; but
Felton called to the officer of the post, and drawing from his pocket
the letter of which he was the bearer, he said, “A pressing message
from Lord de Winter.”

At the name of Lord de Winter, who was known to be one of his Grace’s
most intimate friends, the officer of the post gave orders to let
Felton pass, who, besides, wore the uniform of a naval officer.

Felton darted into the palace.

At the moment he entered the vestibule, another man was entering
likewise, dusty, out of breath, leaving at the gate a post horse,
which, on reaching the palace, tumbled on his foreknees.

Felton and he addressed Patrick, the duke’s confidential lackey, at the
same moment. Felton named Lord de Winter; the unknown would not name
anybody, and pretended that it was to the duke alone he would make
himself known. Each was anxious to gain admission before the other.

Patrick, who knew Lord de Winter was in affairs of the service, and in
relations of friendship with the duke, gave the preference to the one
who came in his name. The other was forced to wait, and it was easily
to be seen how he cursed the delay.

The valet led Felton through a large hall in which waited the deputies
from La Rochelle, headed by the Prince de Soubise, and introduced him
into a closet where Buckingham, just out of the bath, was finishing his
toilet, upon which, as at all times, he bestowed extraordinary
attention.

“Lieutenant Felton, from Lord de Winter,” said Patrick.

“From Lord de Winter!” repeated Buckingham; “let him come in.”

Felton entered. At that moment Buckingham was throwing upon a couch a
rich toilet robe, worked with gold, in order to put on a blue velvet
doublet embroidered with pearls.

“Why didn’t the baron come himself?” demanded Buckingham. “I expected
him this morning.”

“He desired me to tell your Grace,” replied Felton, “that he very much
regretted not having that honor, but that he was prevented by the guard
he is obliged to keep at the castle.”

“Yes, I know that,” said Buckingham; “he has a prisoner.”

“It is of that prisoner that I wish to speak to your Grace,” replied
Felton.

“Well, then, speak!”

“That which I have to say of her can only be heard by yourself, my
Lord!”

“Leave us, Patrick,” said Buckingham; “but remain within sound of the
bell. I shall call you presently.”

Patrick went out.

“We are alone, sir,” said Buckingham; “speak!”

“My Lord,” said Felton, “the Baron de Winter wrote to you the other day
to request you to sign an order of embarkation relative to a young
woman named Charlotte Backson.”

“Yes, sir; and I answered him, to bring or send me that order and I
would sign it.”

“Here it is, my Lord.”

“Give it to me,” said the duke.

And taking it from Felton, he cast a rapid glance over the paper, and
perceiving that it was the one that had been mentioned to him, he
placed it on the table, took a pen, and prepared to sign it.

“Pardon, my Lord,” said Felton, stopping the duke; “but does your Grace
know that the name of Charlotte Backson is not the true name of this
young woman?”

“Yes, sir, I know it,” replied the duke, dipping the quill in the ink.

“Then your Grace knows her real name?” asked Felton, in a sharp tone.

“I know it”; and the duke put the quill to the paper. Felton grew pale.

“And knowing that real name, my Lord,” replied Felton, “will you sign
it all the same?”

“Doubtless,” said Buckingham, “and rather twice than once.”

“I cannot believe,” continued Felton, in a voice that became more sharp
and rough, “that your Grace knows that it is to Milady de Winter this
relates.”

“I know it perfectly, although I am astonished that you know it.”

“And will your Grace sign that order without remorse?”

Buckingham looked at the young man haughtily.

“Do you know, sir, that you are asking me very strange questions, and
that I am very foolish to answer them?”

“Reply to them, my Lord,” said Felton; “the circumstances are more
serious than you perhaps believe.”

Buckingham reflected that the young man, coming from Lord de Winter,
undoubtedly spoke in his name, and softened.

“Without remorse,” said he. “The baron knows, as well as myself, that
Milady de Winter is a very guilty woman, and it is treating her very
favorably to commute her punishment to transportation.” The duke put
his pen to the paper.

“You will not sign that order, my Lord!” said Felton, making a step
toward the duke.

“I will not sign this order! And why not?”

“Because you will look into yourself, and you will do justice to the
lady.”

“I should do her justice by sending her to Tyburn,” said Buckingham.
“This lady is infamous.”

“My Lord, Milady de Winter is an angel; you know that she is, and I
demand her liberty of you.”

“Bah! Are you mad, to talk to me thus?” said Buckingham.

“My Lord, excuse me! I speak as I can; I restrain myself. But, my Lord,
think of what you’re about to do, and beware of going too far!”

“What do you say? God pardon me!” cried Buckingham, “I really think he
threatens me!”

“No, my Lord, I still plead. And I say to you: one drop of water
suffices to make the full vase overflow; one slight fault may draw down
punishment upon the head spared, despite many crimes.”

“Mr. Felton,” said Buckingham, “you will withdraw, and place yourself
at once under arrest.”

“You will hear me to the end, my Lord. You have seduced this young
girl; you have outraged, defiled her. Repair your crimes toward her;
let her go free, and I will exact nothing else from you.”

“You will exact!” said Buckingham, looking at Felton with astonishment,
and dwelling upon each syllable of the three words as he pronounced
them.

“My Lord,” continued Felton, becoming more excited as he spoke, “my
Lord, beware! All England is tired of your iniquities; my Lord, you
have abused the royal power, which you have almost usurped; my Lord,
you are held in horror by God and men. God will punish you hereafter,
but I will punish you here!”

“Ah, this is too much!” cried Buckingham, making a step toward the
door.

Felton barred his passage.

“I ask it humbly of you, my Lord,” said he; “sign the order for the
liberation of Milady de Winter. Remember that she is a woman whom you
have dishonored.”

“Withdraw, sir,” said Buckingham, “or I will call my attendant, and
have you placed in irons.”

“You shall not call,” said Felton, throwing himself between the duke
and the bell placed on a stand encrusted with silver. “Beware, my Lord,
you are in the hands of God!”

“In the hands of the devil, you mean!” cried Buckingham, raising his
voice so as to attract the notice of his people, without absolutely
shouting.

“Sign, my Lord; sign the liberation of Milady de Winter,” said Felton,
holding out a paper to the duke.

“By force? You are joking! Holloa, Patrick!”

“Sign, my Lord!”

“Never.”

“Never?”

“Help!” shouted the duke; and at the same time he sprang toward his
sword.

But Felton did not give him time to draw it. He held the knife with
which Milady had stabbed herself, open in his bosom; at one bound he
was upon the duke.

At that moment Patrick entered the room, crying, “A letter from France,
my Lord.”

“From France!” cried Buckingham, forgetting everything in thinking from
whom that letter came.

Felton took advantage of this moment, and plunged the knife into his
side up to the handle.

“Ah, traitor,” cried Buckingham, “you have killed me!”

“Murder!” screamed Patrick.

Felton cast his eyes round for means of escape, and seeing the door
free, he rushed into the next chamber, in which, as we have said, the
deputies from La Rochelle were waiting, crossed it as quickly as
possible, and rushed toward the staircase; but upon the first step he
met Lord de Winter, who, seeing him pale, confused, livid, and stained
with blood both on his hands and face, seized him by the throat,
crying, “I knew it! I guessed it! But too late by a minute,
unfortunate, unfortunate that I am!”

Felton made no resistance. Lord de Winter placed him in the hands of
the guards, who led him, while awaiting further orders, to a little
terrace commanding the sea; and then the baron hastened to the duke’s
chamber.

At the cry uttered by the duke and the scream of Patrick, the man whom
Felton had met in the antechamber rushed into the chamber.

He found the duke reclining upon a sofa, with his hand pressed upon the
wound.

“Laporte,” said the duke, in a dying voice, “Laporte, do you come from
her?”

“Yes, monseigneur,” replied the faithful cloak bearer of Anne of
Austria, “but too late, perhaps.”

“Silence, Laporte, you may be overheard. Patrick, let no one enter. Oh,
I cannot tell what she says to me! My God, I am dying!”

And the duke swooned.

Meanwhile, Lord de Winter, the deputies, the leaders of the expedition,
the officers of Buckingham’s household, had all made their way into the
chamber. Cries of despair resounded on all sides. The news, which
filled the palace with tears and groans, soon became known, and spread
itself throughout the city.

The report of a cannon announced that something new and unexpected had
taken place.

Lord de Winter tore his hair.

“Too late by a minute!” cried he, “too late by a minute! Oh, my God, my
God! what a misfortune!”

He had been informed at seven o’clock in the morning that a rope ladder
floated from one of the windows of the castle; he had hastened to
Milady’s chamber, had found it empty, the window open, and the bars
filed, had remembered the verbal caution D’Artagnan had transmitted to
him by his messenger, had trembled for the duke, and running to the
stable without taking time to have a horse saddled, had jumped upon the
first he found, had galloped off like the wind, had alighted below in
the courtyard, had ascended the stairs precipitately, and on the top
step, as we have said, had encountered Felton.

The duke, however, was not dead. He recovered a little, reopened his
eyes, and hope revived in all hearts.

“Gentlemen,” said he, “leave me alone with Patrick and Laporte—ah, is
that you, De Winter? You sent me a strange madman this morning! See the
state in which he has put me.”

“Oh, my Lord!” cried the baron, “I shall never console myself.”

“And you would be quite wrong, my dear De Winter,” said Buckingham,
holding out his hand to him. “I do not know the man who deserves being
regretted during the whole life of another man; but leave us, I pray
you.”

The baron went out sobbing.

There only remained in the closet of the wounded duke Laporte and
Patrick. A physician was sought for, but none was yet found.

“You will live, my Lord, you will live!” repeated the faithful servant
of Anne of Austria, on his knees before the duke’s sofa.

“What has she written to me?” said Buckingham, feebly, streaming with
blood, and suppressing his agony to speak of her he loved, “what has
she written to me? Read me her letter.”

“Oh, my Lord!” said Laporte.

“Obey, Laporte, do you not see I have no time to lose?”

Laporte broke the seal, and placed the paper before the eyes of the
duke; but Buckingham in vain tried to make out the writing.

“Read!” said he, “read! I cannot see. Read, then! For soon, perhaps, I
shall not hear, and I shall die without knowing what she has written to
me.”

Laporte made no further objection, and read:

“MY LORD, By that which, since I have known you, have suffered by you
and for you, I conjure you, if you have any care for my repose, to
countermand those great armaments which you are preparing against
France, to put an end to a war of which it is publicly said religion is
the ostensible cause, and of which, it is generally whispered, your
love for me is the concealed cause. This war may not only bring great
catastrophes upon England and France, but misfortune upon you, my Lord,
for which I should never console myself.
    “Be careful of your life, which is menaced, and which will be dear
    to me from the moment I am not obliged to see an enemy in you.


“Your affectionate
“ANNE”


Buckingham collected all his remaining strength to listen to the
reading of the letter; then, when it was ended, as if he had met with a
bitter disappointment, he asked, “Have you nothing else to say to me by
the living voice, Laporte?”

“The queen charged me to tell you to watch over yourself, for she had
advice that your assassination would be attempted.”

“And is that all—is that all?” replied Buckingham, impatiently.

“She likewise charged me to tell you that she still loved you.”

“Ah,” said Buckingham, “God be praised! My death, then, will not be to
her as the death of a stranger!”

Laporte burst into tears.

“Patrick,” said the duke, “bring me the casket in which the diamond
studs were kept.”

Patrick brought the object desired, which Laporte recognized as having
belonged to the queen.

“Now the scent bag of white satin, on which her cipher is embroidered
in pearls.”

Patrick again obeyed.

“Here, Laporte,” said Buckingham, “these are the only tokens I ever
received from her—this silver casket and these two letters. You will
restore them to her Majesty; and as a last memorial”—he looked round
for some valuable object—“you will add—”

He still sought; but his eyes, darkened by death, encountered only the
knife which had fallen from the hand of Felton, still smoking with the
blood spread over its blade.

“And you will add to them this knife,” said the duke, pressing the hand
of Laporte. He had just strength enough to place the scent bag at the
bottom of the silver casket, and to let the knife fall into it, making
a sign to Laporte that he was no longer able to speak; then, in a last
convulsion, which this time he had not the power to combat, he slipped
from the sofa to the floor.

Patrick uttered a loud cry.

Buckingham tried to smile a last time; but death checked his thought,
which remained engraved on his brow like a last kiss of love.

At this moment the duke’s surgeon arrived, quite terrified; he was
already on board the admiral’s ship, where they had been obliged to
seek him.

He approached the duke, took his hand, held it for an instant in his
own, and letting it fall, “All is useless,” said he, “he is dead.”

“Dead, dead!” cried Patrick.

At this cry all the crowd re-entered the apartment, and throughout the
palace and town there was nothing but consternation and tumult.

As soon as Lord de Winter saw Buckingham was dead, he ran to Felton,
whom the soldiers still guarded on the terrace of the palace.

“Wretch!” said he to the young man, who since the death of Buckingham
had regained that coolness and self-possession which never after
abandoned him, “wretch! what have you done?”

“I have avenged myself!” said he.

“Avenged yourself,” said the baron. “Rather say that you have served as
an instrument to that accursed woman; but I swear to you that this
crime shall be her last.”

“I don’t know what you mean,” replied Felton, quietly, “and I am
ignorant of whom you are speaking, my Lord. I killed the Duke of
Buckingham because he twice refused you yourself to appoint me captain;
I have punished him for his injustice, that is all.”

De Winter, stupefied, looked on while the soldiers bound Felton, and
could not tell what to think of such insensibility.

One thing alone, however, threw a shade over the pallid brow of Felton.
At every noise he heard, the simple Puritan fancied he recognized the
step and voice of Milady coming to throw herself into his arms, to
accuse herself, and die with him.

All at once he started. His eyes became fixed upon a point of the sea,
commanded by the terrace where he was. With the eagle glance of a
sailor he had recognized there, where another would have seen only a
gull hovering over the waves, the sail of a sloop which was directed
toward the coast of France.

He grew deadly pale, placed his hand upon his heart, which was
breaking, and at once perceived all the treachery.

“One last favor, my Lord!” said he to the baron.

“What?” asked his Lordship.

“What o’clock is it?”

The baron drew out his watch. “It wants ten minutes to nine,” said he.

Milady had hastened her departure by an hour and a half. As soon as she
heard the cannon which announced the fatal event, she had ordered the
anchor to be weighed. The vessel was making way under a blue sky, at
great distance from the coast.

“God has so willed it!” said he, with the resignation of a fanatic; but
without, however, being able to take his eyes from that ship, on board
of which he doubtless fancied he could distinguish the white outline of
her to whom he had sacrificed his life.

De Winter followed his look, observed his feelings, and guessed all.

“Be punished _alone_, for the first, miserable man!” said Lord de
Winter to Felton, who was being dragged away with his eyes turned
toward the sea; “but I swear to you by the memory of my brother whom I
have loved so much that your accomplice is not saved.”

Felton lowered his head without pronouncing a syllable.

As to Lord de Winter, he descended the stairs rapidly, and went
straight to the port.




Chapter LX.
IN FRANCE


The first fear of the King of England, Charles I., on learning of the
death of the duke, was that such terrible news might discourage the
Rochellais; he tried, says Richelieu in his _Memoirs_, to conceal it
from them as long as possible, closing all the ports of his kingdom,
and carefully keeping watch that no vessel should sail until the army
which Buckingham was getting together had gone, taking upon himself, in
default of Buckingham, to superintend the departure.

He carried the strictness of this order so far as to detain in England
the ambassadors of Denmark, who had taken their leave, and the regular
ambassador of Holland, who was to take back to the port of Flushing the
Indian merchantmen of which Charles I. had made restitution to the
United Provinces.

But as he did not think of giving this order till five hours after the
event—that is to say, till two o’clock in the afternoon—two vessels had
already left the port, the one bearing, as we know, Milady, who,
already anticipating the event, was further confirmed in that belief by
seeing the black flag flying at the masthead of the admiral’s ship.

As to the second vessel, we will tell hereafter whom it carried, and
how it set sail.

During this time nothing new occurred in the camp at La Rochelle; only
the king, who was bored, as always, but perhaps a little more so in
camp than elsewhere, resolved to go incognito and spend the festival of
St. Louis at St. Germain, and asked the cardinal to order him an escort
of only twenty Musketeers. The cardinal, who sometimes became weary of
the king, granted this leave of absence with great pleasure to his
royal lieutenant, who promised to return about the fifteenth of
September.

M. de Tréville, being informed of this by his Eminence, packed his
portmanteau; and as without knowing the cause he knew the great desire
and even imperative need which his friends had of returning to Paris,
it goes without saying that he fixed upon them to form part of the
escort.

The four young men heard the news a quarter of an hour after M. de
Tréville, for they were the first to whom he communicated it. It was
then that D’Artagnan appreciated the favor the cardinal had conferred
upon him in making him at last enter the Musketeers—for without that
circumstance he would have been forced to remain in the camp while his
companions left it.

It goes without saying that this impatience to return toward Paris had
for a cause the danger which Mme. Bonacieux would run of meeting at the
convent of Béthune with Milady, her mortal enemy. Aramis therefore had
written immediately to Marie Michon, the seamstress at Tours who had
such fine acquaintances, to obtain from the queen authority for Mme.
Bonacieux to leave the convent, and to retire either into Lorraine or
Belgium. They had not long to wait for an answer. Eight or ten days
afterward Aramis received the following letter:

“MY DEAR COUSIN, Here is the authorization from my sister to withdraw
our little servant from the convent of Béthune, the air of which you
think is bad for her. My sister sends you this authorization with great
pleasure, for she is very partial to the little girl, to whom she
intends to be more serviceable hereafter.


“I salute you,
“MARIE MICHON”


To this letter was added an order, conceived in these terms:

“At the Louvre, August 10, 1628


“The superior of the convent of Béthune will place in the hands of the
person who shall present this note to her the novice who entered the
convent upon my recommendation and under my patronage.


“ANNE”


It may be easily imagined how the relationship between Aramis and a
seamstress who called the queen her sister amused the young men; but
Aramis, after having blushed two or three times up to the whites of his
eyes at the gross pleasantry of Porthos, begged his friends not to
revert to the subject again, declaring that if a single word more was
said to him about it, he would never again implore his cousins to
interfere in such affairs.

There was no further question, therefore, about Marie Michon among the
four Musketeers, who besides had what they wanted: that was, the order
to withdraw Mme. Bonacieux from the convent of the Carmelites of
Béthune. It was true that this order would not be of great use to them
while they were in camp at La Rochelle; that is to say, at the other
end of France. Therefore D’Artagnan was going to ask leave of absence
of M. de Tréville, confiding to him candidly the importance of his
departure, when the news was transmitted to him as well as to his three
friends that the king was about to set out for Paris with an escort of
twenty Musketeers, and that they formed part of the escort.

Their joy was great. The lackeys were sent on before with the baggage,
and they set out on the morning of the sixteenth.

The cardinal accompanied his Majesty from Surgères to Mauzes; and there
the king and his minister took leave of each other with great
demonstrations of friendship.

The king, however, who sought distraction, while traveling as fast as
possible—for he was anxious to be in Paris by the twenty-third—stopped
from time to time to fly the magpie, a pastime for which the taste had
been formerly inspired in him by de Luynes, and for which he had always
preserved a great predilection. Out of the twenty Musketeers sixteen,
when this took place, rejoiced greatly at this relaxation; but the
other four cursed it heartily. D’Artagnan, in particular, had a
perpetual buzzing in his ears, which Porthos explained thus: “A very
great lady has told me that this means that somebody is talking of you
somewhere.”

At length the escort passed through Paris on the twenty-third, in the
night. The king thanked M. de Tréville, and permitted him to distribute
furloughs for four days, on condition that the favored parties should
not appear in any public place, under penalty of the Bastille.

The first four furloughs granted, as may be imagined, were to our four
friends. Still further, Athos obtained of M. de Tréville six days
instead of four, and introduced into these six days two more nights—for
they set out on the twenty-fourth at five o’clock in the evening, and
as a further kindness M. de Tréville post-dated the leave to the
morning of the twenty-fifth.

“Good Lord!” said D’Artagnan, who, as we have often said, never
stumbled at anything. “It appears to me that we are making a great
trouble of a very simple thing. In two days, and by using up two or
three horses (that’s nothing; I have plenty of money), I am at Béthune.
I present my letter from the queen to the superior, and I bring back
the dear treasure I go to seek—not into Lorraine, not into Belgium, but
to Paris, where she will be much better concealed, particularly while
the cardinal is at La Rochelle. Well, once returned from the country,
half by the protection of her cousin, half through what we have
personally done for her, we shall obtain from the queen what we desire.
Remain, then, where you are, and do not exhaust yourselves with useless
fatigue. Myself and Planchet are all that such a simple expedition
requires.”

To this Athos replied quietly: “We also have money left—for I have not
yet drunk all my share of the diamond, and Porthos and Aramis have not
eaten all theirs. We can therefore use up four horses as well as one.
But consider, D’Artagnan,” added he, in a tone so solemn that it made
the young man shudder, “consider that Béthune is a city where the
cardinal has given rendezvous to a woman who, wherever she goes, brings
misery with her. If you had only to deal with four men, D’Artagnan, I
would allow you to go alone. You have to do with that woman! We four
will go; and I hope to God that with our four lackeys we may be in
sufficient number.”

“You terrify me, Athos!” cried D’Artagnan. “My God! what do you fear?”

“Everything!” replied Athos.

D’Artagnan examined the countenances of his companions, which, like
that of Athos, wore an impression of deep anxiety; and they continued
their route as fast as their horses could carry them, but without
adding another word.

On the evening of the twenty-fifth, as they were entering Arras, and as
D’Artagnan was dismounting at the inn of the Golden Harrow to drink a
glass of wine, a horseman came out of the post yard, where he had just
had a relay, started off at a gallop, and with a fresh horse took the
road to Paris. At the moment he passed through the gateway into the
street, the wind blew open the cloak in which he was wrapped, although
it was in the month of August, and lifted his hat, which the traveler
seized with his hand the moment it had left his head, pulling it
eagerly over his eyes.

D’Artagnan, who had his eyes fixed upon this man, became very pale, and
let his glass fall.

“What is the matter, monsieur?” said Planchet. “Oh, come, gentlemen, my
master is ill!”

The three friends hastened toward D’Artagnan, who, instead of being
ill, ran toward his horse. They stopped him at the door.

“Well, where the devil are you going now?” cried Athos.

“It is he!” cried D’Artagnan, pale with anger, and with the sweat on
his brow, “it is he! let me overtake him!”

“He? What he?” asked Athos.

“He, that man!”

“What man?”

“That cursed man, my evil genius, whom I have always met with when
threatened by some misfortune, he who accompanied that horrible woman
when I met her for the first time, he whom I was seeking when I
offended our Athos, he whom I saw on the very morning Madame Bonacieux
was abducted. I have seen him; that is he! I recognized him when the
wind blew upon his cloak.”

“The devil!” said Athos, musingly.

“To saddle, gentlemen! to saddle! Let us pursue him, and we shall
overtake him!”

“My dear friend,” said Aramis, “remember that he goes in an opposite
direction from that in which we are going, that he has a fresh horse,
and ours are fatigued, so that we shall disable our own horses without
even a chance of overtaking him. Let the man go, D’Artagnan; let us
save the woman.”

“Monsieur, monsieur!” cried a hostler, running out and looking after
the stranger, “monsieur, here is a paper which dropped out of your hat!
Eh, monsieur, eh!”

“Friend,” said D’Artagnan, “a half-pistole for that paper!”

“My faith, monsieur, with great pleasure! Here it is!”

The hostler, enchanted with the good day’s work he had done, returned
to the yard. D’Artagnan unfolded the paper.

“Well?” eagerly demanded all his three friends.

“Nothing but one word!” said D’Artagnan.

“Yes,” said Aramis, “but that one word is the name of some town or
village.”

“_Armentières_,” read Porthos; “Armentières? I don’t know such a
place.”

“And that name of a town or village is written in her hand!” cried
Athos.

“Come on, come on!” said D’Artagnan; “let us keep that paper carefully,
perhaps I have not thrown away my half-pistole. To horse, my friends,
to horse!”

And the four friends flew at a gallop along the road to Béthune.
